there are a million things that we do every day without thinking . brushing our teeth drying our hair after a shower and unlocking our phone screen so we can check our messages are all part of our routine . but what takes place in the brain as we learn a new habit what happens in the brain when habits take shape whats something youve learned to do without thinking it might be locking the door behind you as you leave which could lead to some panic later as you wonder if you actually remembered to do it . it might be driving to work . have you ever had that uncanny experience of finding yourself at your destination without fully remembering how you got there i certainly have and its all thanks to the brains trusty autopilot mode . habits drive our lives so much so that sometimes we might want to break the habit as the saying goes and experience something new . but habits are a useful tool when we do something enough times we become effortlessly good at it which is perhaps why aristotle reportedly believed that `` excellence ... is not an act but a habit . '' so what does habit formation look like in the brain how do our neural networks behave as we learn something and consolidate it into an effortless behavior through repetition these are the questions that ann graybiel and her colleagues from the massachusetts institute of technology in chestnut hill set out to answer in a recent study the findings of which are published in the journal current biology . bookending neural signals although a habitual action seems so simple and effortless it actually typically involves a string of small necessary movements such as unlocking the car getting into it adjusting the mirrors securing the seatbelt and so on . this complex set of movements that amount to one routine action that we perform unconsciously is called `` chunking '' and although we know that it exists exactly how `` chunks '' form and stabilize has remained mysterious so far . could this protein hold the key to memory to store or not to store learn about the protein that may hold the key to memory retention . read now the new study now suggests that some brain cells are tasked with `` bookending '' the chunks that correspond to habitual actions . in another study graybiel and her former team found that the striatum a region of the brain previously associated with decisionmaking also plays an important role in acquiring habits . working with mice the team noted that the patterns of signals transmitted between neurons in the striatum shifted as the animals were taught a new sequence of actions turning in one direction at a sound signal while navigating a maze which then evolved into a habit . at the beginning of the learning process the neurons in the mices striata emitted a continuous string of signals the scientists saw but as the mices actions started to consolidate into habitual movements the neurons fired their distinctive signals only at the beginning and at the end of the task performed . when a signaling pattern takes root explain graybiel and colleagues a habit has taken shape and breaking it becomes a difficult endeavor . brain patterns that indicate habits although edifying graybiels previous efforts did not establish for certain that the signaling patterns observed in the brain were related to habit formation . they could simply have been motor commands that regulated the mices running behavior . in order to confirm the idea that the patterns corresponded to the chunking associated with habit formation graybiel and her current team devised a different set of experiments . in the new study they set out to teach rats to press two levers repeatedly in a specific order . the researchers used reward conditioning to motivate the animals . if they pressed the levers in the correct sequence they were offered chocolate milk . to ensure that there would be no doubt regarding the solidity of the experiments results and that they would be able to identify brain activity patterns related to habit formation rather than anything else the scientists taught the rats different sequences . sure enough once the animals had learned to press the levers in the sequence established by their trainers the team noticed the same `` bookending '' pattern in the striatum sets of neurons would fire signals at the beginning and end of a task thus delimitating a `` chunk . '' `` i think '' explains graybiel `` this more or less proves that the development of bracketing patterns serves to package up a behavior that the brain and the animals consider valuable and worth keeping in their repertoire . '' `` it really is a highlevel signal that helps to release that habit and we think the end signal says the routine has been done . '' ann graybiel finally the team also noted the formation of another complementary pattern of activity in a group of inhibitory brain cells called `` interneurons '' in the striatum . `` the interneurons '' explains lead study author nuné martiros of harvard university in cambridge ma `` were activated during the time when the rats were in the middle of performing the learned sequence . '' she adds that the interneurons `` could possibly be preventing the principal neurons from initiating another routine until the current one was finished . '' `` the discovery of this opposite activity by the interneurons '' martiros concludes `` also gets us one step closer to understanding how brain circuits can actually produce this pattern of activity . ''eat well for a long and healthy life – thats a mantra that were all familiar with but what are the best foods to help us achieve that goal in this article we give you an overview of some of the most healthful and nutritious foods . what are the best foods for a healthful diet we investigate . official figures indicate that currently the top three countries in the world with the highest life expectancy are the principality of monaco japan and singapore . these are places where the inhabitants experience a high quality of life and an important element of that is eating healthful meals . often we find praise for `` superfoods '' in the media – foods so high in nutritional value that they are seen as dietary superheroes . nutritionists reject the term `` superfoods '' as a buzzword that can influence people to place too high an expectation on a limited range of foods when in reality a balanced diet and healthful lifestyle require more effort than eating your fiveaday . still there are certain foods that are more nutritious than others and many that as research has shown have a protective effect against a range of diseases . here we give you an overview of some of the best foods that you may want to consider including in your diet in your quest for a happy healthy life . edamame soybeans edamame or fresh soybeans have been a staple of asian cuisine for generations but they have also been gaining popularity on the western front of late . soybeans are often sold in snack packs but they are also added to a varied range of dishes from soups to ricebased meals though they are served as cooked and seasoned on their own too . edamame and tofu are rich in isoflavones which may have anticancer properties . the beans are rich in isoflavones a type of phytoestrogen – that is . plantderived estrogenlike substances . isoflavones are known to have antiinflammatory antioxidant anticancer and antimicrobial properties . thus they can help to regulate the inflammatory response of the body slow down cellular aging fight microbes as well as reportedly protect against certain types of cancer . edamame are rich in two types of isoflavones in particular genistein and daidzein . a study covered last year on medical news today found that genistein could be used to improve breast cancer treatment . in the meantime the study authors note that `` lifetime intake of soy ... has been linked to reduced risk of breast cancer '' so we may want to include soybeans in our normal diet . tofu soybean curd similarly tofu a white cheeselike product made of soybean curds has been linked to a wealth of health benefits for the same reasons . tofu is often found cooked in typical eastern asian dishes it can be fried baked or boiled for instance in soups . as a soy product it is rich in isoflavones whose health benefits weve outlined above it is also a good source of protein and it contains all the essential amino acids that our bodies need to synthesize protein . moreover it is also rich in minerals which our bodies need to keep our teeth and bones strong and healthy and to derive energy . tofu is a source of calcium iron manganese selenium phosphorous magnesium zinc and copper . some specialists also suggest that eating tofu can make you feel fuller for longer so incorporating it into your meals may help to prevent overeating . carrots this common culinary ingredient best known in its orange variety is famously recommended for its high content of betacarotene a pigment and carotenoid that gives the widespread version of this root vegetable its color . carrots can protect against agerelated eyesight damage . betacarotene can be converted by our bodies into vitamin a which according to the national institutes of health nih `` is involved in immune function vision reproduction and cellular communication . '' our bodies can not produce vitamin a on their own so it must be derived from our diet . this pigment is also an antioxidant that can protect the cells in our bodies from the aging damage caused by free radicals . moreover research has shown that foods rich in carotenoids and of course carrots are a prime example here can protect against agerelated macular degeneration the vision damage caused by old age . some varieties of carrots such as white carrots do not contain the orange pigment betacarotene but they do all contain falcarinol a nutrient which some studies claim may have a protective effect against cancer . while raw carrots may be best for health as they retain their nutrients there are also ways of cooking carrots that can keep most of their nutrients `` locked in . '' in an interview one researcher who investigated the anticancer effect of falcarinol from carrots kirsten brandt from newcastle university in the united kingdom suggests that we may want to boil our carrots whole if we want them cooked but still bursting with nutrients . `` chopping up your carrots increases the surface area so more of the nutrients leach out into the water while they are cooked . by keeping them whole and chopping them up afterwards you are locking in nutrients and the taste so the carrot is better for you all round . '' cruciferous vegetables another important type of food on our list are cruciferous vegetables also known as `` brassica vegetables '' which include a wide array of green foods such as cabbage broccoli brussels sprouts cauliflower bok choy radish and kale . cruciferous vegetables can bring a wealth of health benefits . these vegetables boast an especially rich nutrient content including many vitamins c e k and folate minerals potassium calcium and selenium and carotenoids lutein betacarotene and zeaxanthin . cruciferous vegetables also contain glucosinolates the substances that give these greens their characteristic pungent flavor . these substances have been found to bring diverse health benefits . some glucosinolates seem to regulate the bodys stress and inflammation response they have antimicrobial properties and some of them are being investigated for their anticancer potential . one recent study covered on mnt found that leafy greens including some cruciferous vegetables such as kale and collard greens helped to slow down cognitive decline . consequently the study researchers suggest that `` adding a daily serving of green leafy vegetables to your diet may be a simple way to foster your brain health . '' kale broccoli and cabbage have also been shown to have a protective effect on heart health thanks to their vitamin k content . finally cruciferous vegetables are also a great source of soluble fiber which plays a role in regulating blood sugar levels and diminishing the absorption of fat thus helping to prevent excess weight gain . salmon recent studies have suggested that consumption of meat mostly red meat but also some kinds of poultry meat could be harmful to our health in the long run . a good alternative for protein in this case is fish and salmon in particular affords many nutritional benefits . salmon could protect cognitive health researchers say . salmon is packed with protein and also contains plenty of omega3 fatty acids which is said to be beneficial for eyesight . research has demonstrated that omega3 protects against dryeye syndrome characterized by insufficient lubrication of the eyes which can lead to soreness and blurred vision . moreover omega3 fatty acids have been associated with brain health and research suggests that they can stave off cognitive decline associated with aging . salmon also has a high potassium content and according to a new study reported on mnt last autumn potassium can prevent the onset of heart disease . additionally this type of fish is rich in the mineral selenium which contributes to the health of the thyroid gland . the thyroid gland helps to regulate hormonal activity and is involved in metabolic processes . what are the best diets for 2018 learn which diets researchers recommend for a healthy life . read now although both farmed and wild salmon are available on the market wild salmon has been found to be more nutritious overall with a higher protein content and also to have less saturated fat which means that it is more healthful and better for weight management . however farmed salmon is a more sustainable resource and specialists say that the differences between farmed and wild caught salmon may not be so stark as to motivate us to prefer one type over the other . citrus fruits finally citrus fruits are the unsung heroes of a healthful diet these include a number of fruits that are now available worldwide such as oranges grapefruit lemons limes clementines mandarins and tangerines . the flavonoids in citrus fruits have been cited in connection to longer lifespans . for a long time citrus fruits have been recommended by nutritionists and grandmothers alike for their high content of vitamin c which has antioxidant properties and is said to bring a wide array of health benefits including to reduce inflammatory damage and to fend off infections . specialists point out however that this type of fruits goes well beyond just vitamin c when it comes to nutritional content . `` the fruits are abundant in other macronutrients including sugars dietary fiber potassium folate calcium thiamin niacin vitamin b6 phosphorus magnesium copper riboflavin and pantothenic acid . '' if this list of dietary goodies hasnt colored you impressed the specialists then go on to explain how citrus fruits contain even more organic compounds such as flavonoids coumarins and carotenoids that have been said to have protective effects against cancer cardiovascular diseases and neurodegenerative diseases . research has shown that flavonoids in which citrus fruits are particularly rich can `` prevent or delay chronic diseases caused by obesity . '' flavonoids have also garnered a lot of scientific attention for their anticancer potential and consumption of especially flavonoidrich citrus fruits has been associated with a significantly prolonged lifespan . the inhabitants of the japanese prefecture of okinawa known to be some of the longestliving populations of the world regularly eat shikuwasa also known as `` shequasar '' a citrus fruit typical of the region which contains more flavonoids than most other citrus fruits . drinking shikuwasa juice rich in flavonoid content has also been linked to better liver health . although all of the foods mentioned above are appreciated for their significant health benefits we should not forget that wellbeing and longevity can not be achieved without a balanced inclusive diet and a healthful lifestyle . moreover current studies suggest that our genetic makeup may have an important say as to which foods work best for our health . so keeping our list of nutritious foods in mind make sure you follow the healthful diet that is most effective for youwhen it comes to new years resolutions eating better is at the top of our list . but which diet plan is the best a panel of health experts on behalf of u.s. news world report reveal the toprated diets for 2018. u.s. news world report reveal the best diets for 2018. it is estimated that around 45 million people in the united states go on a diet each year with weight loss being the primary goal . however whether youre dieting to lose weight or simply to improve overall health sticking to a specific eating plan can be challenging . with so many diets to choose from how can you tell which one will work for you u.s. news world report put together a panel of health experts every year to evaluate the most popular diets in the u.s. this year the experts assessed 40 diets ranking them from lowest to highest in seven categories including the best diets for weight loss diabetes and heart health . so we take a look at some of the key results . the best diets for weight loss for the majority of dieters weight loss is the ultimate goal but losing weight and keeping it off is far from easy . research suggests that approximately 30–35 percent of weight lost from dieting is regained within 1 year . but it is possible to maintain weight loss . its just a matter of finding the right eating plan . the u.s. news world report panel of experts evaluated 40 popular diets for their effects on both short and longterm weight loss noting that some people want to lose weight quickly while others want to maintain their weight loss for years to come . the health experts rated weight watchers as the best diet on both accounts scoring 4 out of 5 for shortterm weight loss and 3.5 out of 5 for longterm weight loss . a highfat diet without the weight gain study says its possible researchers say that there could be a way to avoid weight gain due to a highfat diet . read now one of the longestrunning wellknown commercial diets weight watchers incorporates a points system wherein foods and beverages are assigned points based on their nutritional values and dieters are assigned a daily points allowance . according to u.s. news world report the expert panel `` appreciated the programs support system which helps dieters keep the pounds off . '' the volumetrics diet came in at second place for best weight loss diet scoring 3.8 out of 5 for shortterm weight loss and 3.3 out of 5 for longterm weight loss . designed by barbara rolls who is a professor of nutrition working at pennsylvania state university in centre county the volumetrics diet focuses on putting foods with lowenergy density such as lowfat milk grains and nonstarchy fruits and vegetables at the forefront of ones diet as well as limiting foods with highenergy density . the best diets for heart health heart disease is the leading cause of death for men and women in the u.s. killing around 610000 people in the country every year . a poor diet can increase the risk of heart disease because eating food high in fat can lead to high blood pressure high cholesterol levels and obesity which are major risk factors for the condition . but which eating plan is best for a healthy heart for this category the health experts analyzed each of the 40 diets and gave them average hearthealth ratings . the dietary approaches to stop hypertension dash diet took first place in this category . developed by the national heart lung and blood institute a part of the national institutes of health nih the dash diet is high in fruits vegetables whole grains fish poultry and lowfat dairy but it limits foods high in sugar and saturated and trans fats . the dash diet was also ranked the best overall diet . the mediterranean diet which emphasizes consuming fish and seafood at least twice weekly alongside regular consumption of fruits vegetables legumes and whole grains took joint second place for best hearthealthy diet alongside the ornish diet . with the ornish diet fat is limited to 10 percent of daily calories and foods are divided into five groups from the least to most healthful . the best diets for diabetes the mediterranean diet not only ranked highly for one of the best hearthealthy diets but it also took the crown for the best diabetes diet scoring 3.7 out of 5. it is estimated that around 30.3 million people in the u.s. are living with diabetes wherein blood glucose levels become too high due to the bodys inability to produce or effectively use insulin . although eating a healthful diet is important for all of us people with diabetes need to be extra cautious skipping meals or eating the wrong foods may lead to problematic highs and lows in blood glucose levels . according to the panel `` the mediterranean diet is a great option for preventing or controlling diabetes . ... some research has shown that diabetics on a mediterranean diet may improve their levels of hemoglobin a1c a measure of blood sugar over time . '' the dash diet makes yet another appearance here ranking second in the best diabetes diet category with the experts noting that `` its menu looks a lot like widely accepted nutritional guidelines for those with the condition . '' whichever eating plan that you decide is best for you its important to note that physical activity is just as important as the foods you eat . current guidelines recommend that adults should engage in at least 150 minutes of moderateintensity or 75 minutes of vigorousintensity aerobic activity every week .a small pilot study of older people suggests that taking a daily supplement of a nutrient that is present naturally in foods may improve artery health and blood pressure . a certain type of supplement may promote healthy arterial aging and reduced blood pressure . the researchers at the university of colorado boulder found that the supplement called nicotinamide riboside mimics some of the effects of caloric restriction and activates several identical biological pathways . studies of caloric restriction which have been done mainly in rodents and fruit flies and not so much in humans indicate that reducing daily calorie intake by a third may delay the aging process and lengthen lifespan . the new study found that taking nicotinamide riboside supplements significantly improved blood pressure in people with mild hypertension or elevated blood pressure . should the results be confirmed in a larger clinical trial the researchers think that they could have important implications in biomedicine such as increasing treatment options for elevated blood pressure . elevated blood pressure and stage 1 high blood pressure are now defined as a blood pressure of 12080 or 13989 millimeters of mercury respectively which although is not high enough to justify medication is high enough to raise the risk for a heart attack or stroke . currently the recommended options for people with elevated blood pressure include changes to diet and increasing physical activity . senior study author doug seals who is a professor and researcher in the department of integrative physiology and his colleagues report their findings in a paper due to be published in the journal nature communications . stiff arteries blood pressure and aging in a western culture stiffer arteries and the high blood pressure that results from them as we age is so common that it is accepted as a normal consequence of aging . for example the american heart associations aha explanation of high blood pressure states `` the normal aging process can cause the big elastic arteries to become stiff over time . '' in the united states an estimated 103 million adults have high blood pressure and this figure is expected to rise as the population continues to age . however there is evidence that stiff arteries and high blood pressure are not necessarily a normal consequence of aging . although genetics plays a role preserving artery health as we reach our 70s and beyond also depends on things that we can do something about such as lifestyle and diet . nicotinamide riboside nicotinamide riboside is a trace nutrient present in certain foods such as cows milk and in higher concentrations in dietary supplement form . studies have indicated that the nutrient contains `` unique properties as a vitamin b3 '' that include raising insulin sensitivity boosting the effects of exercise protecting the brain and resisting the harmful effects of a highfat diet . high cholesterol in late life may mean better brain health learn how having a total cholesterol level higher in later life than it was in midlife is linked to a lower risk of marked cognitive decline . read now for their study prof. seals and his colleagues recruited 24 lean and healthy men and women from the boulder area . their ages ranged from 55 to 79 and they were put into two groups . one of the groups took 500 milligrams of nicotinamide riboside chloride twice per day for 6 weeks then spent another 6 weeks taking a placebo . the other group followed the opposite pattern they took a placebo for 6 weeks and then a twicedaily 500milligram dose of nicotinamide riboside chloride for another 6 weeks . the team analyzed blood samples that the subjects gave at the end of each treatment period and they took other `` physiological measurements '' at these times . there were no serious side effects . an evolutionary survival mechanism the results showed that taking 1000 milligrams of nicotinamide riboside each day increased levels of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide nad+ by 60 percent . nad+ is a compound that activates sirtuins a group of enzymes thought to be responsible for the beneficial effects that calorie restriction has on healthy aging and longevity . the compound levels of which tend to wane with age is involved in many of the bodys metabolic processes . there is a theory which is supported by research that our bodies are programmed by evolution to conserve nad+ when food is scarce and that this is activated when we restrict calorie intake . more recent research has also begun to investigate the possibility that older adults might regain this protective property and age more healthily by taking supplements of `` nad+ precursors '' such as nicotinamide riboside . the results also found that nicotinamide riboside supplementation caused a drop in systolic blood pressure of 10 points in 13 of the participants who had elevated blood pressure or stage 1 high blood pressure . this represents a 25 percent reduction in the risk of having a heart attack . more work now needed to confirm findings the researchers conclude that their paper is a step forward in highlighting the potential benefits of nicotinamide riboside supplementation in older adults . however they point out that there is still a lot of work to do to confirm that it is safe and effective . they hope to investigate the specific impact of nicotinamide riboside on artery health and blood pressure more robustly in a larger clinical trial . in the meantime another trial is about to investigate the effect of the supplement in older people with mild cognitive impairment a condition that often precedes alzheimers disease . `` this was the first ever study to give this novel compound to humans over a period of time . we found that it is welltolerated and appears to activate some of the same key biological pathways that calorie restriction does . '' prof. doug seals the study was partfunded by chromadex who make the supplements that the researchers used .apps are available for everything these days from shopping to entertainment and travel . apps that claim to help look after your mental health and wellbeing are also available . so we have selected the best apps for mental health . mental health apps may help with conditions such as anxiety and depression as well as enhance psychological wellbeing . approximately 48.3 million adults in the united states are faced with a mental health condition each year and 9.8 million of those are serious conditions that limit the activities of everyday life . among u.s. adults aged 18–44 mood disorders such as depression and bipolar disorder are now the third most common reason for hospitalizations . furthermore those who live with severe mental illness are more likely to face chronic medical conditions and die around 25 years earlier . exercising regularly and eating a healthful diet can boost mental health and wellbeing significantly help to reduce symptoms of depression anxiety and stress and increase endorphins responsible for happiness . apps focus on protecting or improving mental health using methods including meditation hypnosis cognitive behavioral therapy cbt and providing a valuable support network . medical news today have put together a list of the top 10 apps that can help to enhance your wellbeing and look after your mental health . calm android free iphone free calm was branded as apples `` app of the year '' in 2017. the app is designed to reduce anxiety improve sleep and help you to feel happier . calm focuses on the four key areas of meditation breathing sleep and relaxation with the aim of bringing joy clarity and peace to your daily life . the app delivers meditations that can help you to destress as well as breathing programs music and sounds from nature to relax your mind and body and promote better sleep . calm is the perfect app if you are new to meditation but it also offers programs for more advanced users . meditation sessions are available in lengths of 3–25 minutes to fit in with your schedule . headspace android free iphone free headspace uses mindfulness and meditation to help you perform at your best each day . the apps mission is to provide you with the essential tools to achieve a happier healthier life . whether you need to build healthier relationships find a place of calm keep your mind fit or reduce stress headspace has hundreds of themed mindfulness and meditation sessions to support you . the app reports that meditation reduces daily stress and improves focus and attention . what is more using headspace is suggested to enhance compassionate behavior toward others in just 3 weeks . moodnotes iphone $ 3.99 moodnotes is a thought journal and mood diary . the app can be used to capture your feelings and improve your thinking habits through the implementation of cbt and positive psychology . track your mood and increase selfawareness of what influences it . learn to recognize `` traps '' in your thinking and ways to rethink the situation . if you happen to enter a `` thinking trap '' moodnotes will provide suggestions and useful perspectives to reduce stress and enhance wellbeing . progress is viewable in the helpful `` insights '' dashboard . googleadslotinfo.push { '' slotname '' mnt_dlb1 '' slotcontainer '' mnt_dlb1_container } moodpath android free iphone free moodpath is your pocketsized mental health companion . whether you are facing a rough patch or have concerns about your mental health the apps goal is to support you through the difficult times and guide you out the other side . moodpath asks daily questions in order to assess your wellbeing and screen for symptoms of depression . the screening progress aims to increase your awareness of your thoughts emotions and feelings . after a period of 2 weeks the app generates an electronic document that you can discuss with a healthcare professional . more than 150 videos and psychological exercises are available to help you understand your mood and strengthen your mental health . pacifica android free iphone free pacifica is an app with anxiety and stress in mind . it provides a toolbox to deal with daily anxiety and stress along with a highly supportive community of likeminded individuals . pacifica helps you to break cycles of unhelpful thoughts feelings and behaviors through methods such as cbt mindfulness meditation mood tracking and relaxation . the app houses audio lessons and activities that help you to cope with stress and depression and it sets daily challenges to help you tackle anxiety one day at a time and reach your longterm goals . superbetter android free iphone free superbetter is a game focusing on increasing resilience and the ability to remain strong optimistic and motivated when presented with challenging obstacles in life . a study by the university of pennsylvania in philadelphia found that when people played superbetter for 30 days their mood improved symptoms of anxiety and depression decreased and selfbelief to achieve goals increased . the app will help you to adopt new habits improve your skills strengthen relationships complete meaningful projects and achieve lifelong dreams . superbetter also has the potential to help you beat depression and anxiety cope with chronic illness and recover from posttraumatic stress disorder ptsd . 7 cups android free iphone free if you are feeling lonely sad stressed or worried 7 cups could be the perfect app for you . it provides online therapy and emotional support for anxiety and depression . there are more than 160000 trained listeners and licensed therapists who are available to anonymously speak with 247. speak your mind and confide in listeners without the fear of being judged . these listeners can be searched for based on their experience or their specialties such as bullying panic attacks eating disorders relationship breakups and many more . affordable therapy with an online therapist can commence onetoone in a confidential setting . anxiety relief hypnosis android free iphone free anxiety relief hypnosis is an app suggested to help improve relaxation and reduce anxiety within just 1–3 weeks of use . the apps developers say that hypnosis can decrease anxious thoughts and enhance your response to relaxation which in turn resets your behavior and enables an improved response to stress . the app provides an audio session read by a certified hypnotherapist together with calming music and sounds from nature to aid relaxation . the `` awaken at end '' feature can be disabled to allow you to fall into restful sleep at bedtime . happify android free iphone free happify is a space to overcome negative thoughts and stress and build resilience . whether you are feeling stressed anxious or sad happify helps you to regain control of your thoughts and feelings . in fact 86 percent of the apps users report feeling better about their lives after 2 months of using it . happify employs techniques and evidencebased interventions in the areas of cbt positive psychology and mindfulness to help you break old and unhealthful patterns and form new healthful habits . the app offers activities and games to improve your life satisfaction and ability to fight negativity . your emotional wellbeing is calculated as a happiness score that you can improve upon each week . talkspace android free iphone free talkspace is a counseling and therapy app that connects users with a convenient affordable and confidential way to deal with anxiety stress depression relationship issues and chronic illness . a free consultation is provided with a matching agent to identify the ideal therapist for your needs based on several factors . more than 1000 licensed therapists are available who specialize in anxiety phobia depression domestic violence ptsd and more . after upgrading and becoming a member access is given to a secure chat room wherein you can raise and discuss your worries with your private counselor . the apps pricing plans are described as being approximately 80 percent lower than traditional officebased appointments . how to be happy in 2018 find out how to maintain your happiness this year . read nowcancer is the leading cause of death across the globe . for years now researchers have led meticulous studies focused on how to stop this deadly disease in its tracks . how close are we to finding more effective treatments how far has cancer research come the world health organization who note that worldwide nearly 1 in 6 deaths are down to cancer . in the united states alone the national cancer institute nci estimated 1688780 new cancer cases and 600920 cancerrelated deaths in 2017. currently the most common types of cancer treatment are chemotherapy radiotherapy tumor surgery and in the case prostate cancer and breast cancer hormonal therapy . however other types of treatment are beginning to pick up steam therapies that on their own or in combination with other treatments are meant to help defeat cancer more efficiently and ideally have fewer side effects . innovations in cancer treatment aim to address a set of issues that will typically face healthcare providers and patients including aggressive treatment accompanied by unwanted side effects tumor recurrence after treatment surgery or both and aggressive cancers that are resilient to widely utilized treatments . below we review some of the most recent cancer research breakthroughs that give us renewed hope that better therapies and prevention strategies will soon follow suit . boosting the immune systems arsenal one type of therapy that has attracted a lot of attention recently is immunotherapy which aims to reinforce our own bodies existing arsenal against foreign bodies and harmful cells our immune systems response to the spread of cancer tumors . but many types of cancer cell are so dangerous because they have ways of `` duping '' the immune system either into ignoring them altogether or else into giving them a `` helping hand . '' lung cancer tumor growth halved with new approach to stop cancer from spreading we may have to look at mysterious noncoding molecules a recent study suggests . read now therefore some types of aggressive cancer are able to spread more easily and become resistant to chemotherapy or radiotherapy . however thanks to in vitro and in vivo experiments researchers are now learning how they might be able to `` deactivate '' the cancer cells protective systems . a study published last year in nature immunology found that macrophages or white blood cells that are normally tasked with `` eating up '' cellular debris and other harmful foreign `` objects '' failed to obliterate the superaggressive cancer cells . that was because in their interaction with the cancer cells the macrophages read not one but two signals meant to repel their `` cleansing '' action . this knowledge however also showed the scientists the way forward by blocking the two relevant signaling pathways they reenabled the white blood cells to do their work . therapeutic viruses and innovative vaccines a surprising weapon in the fight against cancer could be therapeutic viruses as revealed by a team from the united kingdom earlier this year . in their experiments they managed to use a reovirus to attack brain cancer cells while leaving healthy cells alone . `` this is the first time it has been shown that a therapeutic virus is able to pass through the brainblood barrier '' explained the study authors which `` opens up the possibility that this type of immunotherapy could be used to treat more people with aggressive brain cancers . '' another area for improvement in immunotherapy is `` dendritic vaccines '' a strategy wherein dendritic cells which play a key role in the bodys immune response are collected from a persons body `` armed '' with tumorspecific antigens which will teach them to `` hunt '' and destroy relevant cancer cells and injected back into the body to boost the immune system . in a new study researchers in switzerland identified a way to improve the action of these dendritic vaccines by creating artificial receptors able to recognize and `` abduct '' tiny vesicles that have been linked to cancer tumors spread in the body . by attaching these artificial receptors to the dendritic cells in the `` vaccines '' the therapeutic cells are enabled to recognize harmful cancer cells with more accuracy . importantly recent studies have shown that immunotherapy may work best if delivered in tandem with chemotherapy specifically if the chemotherapy drugs are delivered first and they are followed up with immunotherapy . but this approach does have some pitfalls it is difficult to control the effects of this combined method so sometimes healthy tissue may be attacked alongside cancer tumors . however scientists from two institutions in north carolina have developed a substance that once injected into the body becomes gellike a `` bioresponsive scaffold system . '' the scaffold can hold both chemotherapy and immunotherapy drugs at once releasing them systematically into primary tumors . this method allows for a better control of both therapies ensuring that the drugs act on the targeted tumor alone . the nanoparticle revolution speaking of specially developed tools for delivering drugs straight to the tumor and hunting down micro tumors with accuracy and efficiency the past couple of years have seen a `` boom '' in nanotechnology and nanoparticle developments for cancer treatments . nanoparticles could be a gamechanger in cancer treatment . nanoparticles are microscopic particles that have garnered so much attention in clinical research among other fields because they bring us the chance to develop precise less invasive methods of tackling disease . vitally they can target cancer cells or cancer tumors without harming healthy cells in the surrounding environment . some nanoparticles have now been created to provide very focused hyperthermic treatment which is a type of therapy that uses hot temperatures to make cancer tumors shrink . last year scientists from china and the u.k. managed to come up with a type of `` selfregulating '' nanoparticle that was able to expose tumors to heat while avoiding contact with healthy tissue . `` this could potentially be a gamechanger in the way we treat people who have cancer '' said one of the researchers in charge of this project . these tiny vehicles can also be used to target cancer stemlike cells which are undifferentiated cells that have been linked to the resilience of certain types of cancer in the face of traditional treatments such as chemotherapy . thus nanoparticles can be `` loaded '' with drugs and set to `` hunt down '' cancer stem cells to prevent the growth or recurrence of tumors . scientists have experimented with drugfilled nanoparticles in the treatment of various types of cancer including breast cancer and endometrial cancer . no less importantly minuscule vehicles called `` nanoprobes '' can be used to detect the presence of micrometastases which are secondary tumors so tiny that they can not be seen using traditional methods . dr. steven k. libutti director of the rutgers cancer institute of new jersey in new brunswick calls micrometastases `` the achilles heel of surgical management for cancer '' and argues that nanoprobes `` go a long way to solving such problems . '' tumor starvation strategies another type of strategy that researchers have been investigating of late is that of `` starving '' tumors of the nutrients they need to grow and spread . this scientists point out could be a saving grace in the case of aggressive resilient cancers that can not effectively be eradicated otherwise . one novel method of attacking cancer is by starving cancer cells to death . three different studies whose results were all published in january this year looked at ways of cutting off cancers nutritional supplies . one of these studies looked at ways of stopping glutamine a naturally occurring amino acid from feeding cancer cells . certain cancers such as breast lung and colon are known to use this amino acid to support their growth . by blocking cancer cells access to glutamine the researchers managed to maximize the impact of oxidative stress a process that eventually induces cell death on these cells . some aggressive types of breast cancer may be halted by stopping the cells from `` feeding '' on a particular enzyme that helps them to produce the energy they need to thrive . another way of depleting cancer cells of energy is by blocking their access to vitamin b2 as researchers from the university of salford in the u.k. have observed . as one study author says `` this is hopefully the beginning of an alternative approach to halting cancer stem cells . '' this strategy could help individuals receiving cancer treatment to avoid the toxic side effects of chemotherapy . cancer treatments and epigenetics epigenetics refers to the changes caused in our bodies by alterations in gene expression which dictate whether certain characteristics appear or if certain `` actions '' are affected at a biological level . according to research that addressed the impact of such changes many cancers as well as the behaviors of cancer cells are determined by epigenetic factors . `` recent advances in the field of epigenetics have shown that human cancer cells harbor global epigenetic abnormalities in addition to numerous genetic alterations . '' `` these genetic and epigenetic alterations interact at all stages of cancer development working together to promote cancer progression . '' thus it is crucial for specialists to understand when and where to intervene and the expression of which genes they may need to switch on or off depending on their role in the development of cancer . one study for instance found that the gene responsible for the advent of huntingtons disease produces a set of molecules whose action may actually prevent cancer from occurring . now the researchers challenge is to channel the therapeutic potential of this process without triggering huntingtons disease . however the scientists are hopeful . `` we believe a shortterm treatment cancer therapy for a few weeks might be possible '' says the studys senior author . another recent study was able to establish that estrogenreceptor positive breast cancers that become resistant to chemotherapy gain their resilience through genetic mutations that `` confer a metastatic advantage to the tumor . '' but this knowledge also gave researchers the `` break '' that they needed to come up with an improved treatment for such stubborn tumors a combination therapy that delivers the chemotherapeutic drug fulvestrant alongside an experimental enzyme inhibitor . what does this all mean cancer research is running at full speed taking advantage of all the technological advances that science has achieved over recent years . but what does that mean in terms of coming up with a cure for cancer whether or not there will ever be a cure for all cancer types is currently a matter of strong debate although promising studies are published and covered by the media almost every day cancer types vary immensely . this makes it very difficult to say that an approach that works for one type will be adaptable to all . also while there is much emerging research promising more effective treatments most of these projects are still in their early stages having conducted in vitro and in vivo experiments . some potential treatments still have a long way to go before clinical trials in human patients . still that doesnt mean we should lose all hope . some researchers explain that these efforts should make us optimistic while we may not be at the stage where we can claim that cancer can easily be eradicated our furthered knowledge and ever more precise tools keep us ahead of the game and improve our odds in the fight against this disease .new research published in the journal aging finds a compound that stops cancer cells from spreading by starving them of vitamin b2 . the findings may revolutionize traditional chemotherapy . current chemotherapy has a wide range of serious side effects but that may be about to change suggests new research . a team of britishbased researchers set out to find a nontoxic therapeutic agent that targets the mitochondria of cancer cells . mitochondria are energyproducing organelles found inside each cell . the compound recently found by the scientists can stop cancer stemlike cells from proliferating by interfering with their energycreating process inside the mitochondria . the team was led by prof. michael lisanti the chair of translational medicine at the university of salford in the united kingdom and the new study can be accessed here . starving cancer cells of energy prof. lisanti and his colleagues used drugscreening to identify the compound which is called diphenyleneiodonium chloride dpi . as the researchers explain various cell assays and other cell culture experiments revealed that dpi reduced over 90 percent of the energy produced in the cells mitochondria . dpi achieved this by blocking vitamin b2 also known as riboflavin which depleted the cells of energy . `` our observation is that dpi is selectively attacking the cancer stem cells by effectively creating a vitamin deficiency ... . in other words by turning off energy production in cancer stem cells we are creating a process of hibernation . '' prof. michael lisanti the cancer stem cells are the ones that produce the tumor . `` its extraordinary '' continues prof. lisanti `` the cells just sit there as if in a state of suspended animation . '' importantly dpi proved to be nontoxic for socalled `` bulk '' cancer cells which are largely thought to be nontumorigenic . is chemo at the heart of cancer regrowth paradoxically the very treatment that is supposed to stop cancer from spreading sometimes enables it to do so . read now this suggests that the compound might be successful where current chemotherapy fails . the team explains `` dpi treatment can be used to acutely confer a mitochondrialdeficient phenotype which we show effectively depletes cancer stemlike cells from the heterogeneous cancer cell population . '' `` these findings have significant therapeutic implications for potently targeting cancer stemlike cells while minimizing toxic side effects '' they add . a new era of chemotherapy '' we believe '' say the scientists `` that dpi is one of the most potent and highly selective cancer stemlike cells inhibitors discovered to date . '' the findings are particularly significant given the dire need for nontoxic cancer therapies and the serious side effects of conventional chemotherapy . `` the beauty of dpi is that it makes the cancer stem cells metabolically inflexible so that they will be highly susceptible to many other drugs '' explains prof. lisanti . study coauthor prof. federica sotgia also comments on the significance of the recent findings saying `` in terms of chemotherapies for cancer we clearly need something better than what we have at present and this is hopefully the beginning of an alternative approach to halting cancer stem cells . '' in fact the authors specialize in finding alternative nontoxic therapies and they hope that their most recent findings will mark the beginning of a new era of chemotherapy perhaps one that uses nontoxic molecules to target the mitochondrial activity of cancer stemlike cells . the researchers propose to call these new molecules `` mitoflavoscins . ''periods usually arrive once each month but the exact date flow cramp severity and accompanying symptoms are not quite that consistent . for this very reason the app market is flooded with period trackers that aim to offer insight into your monthly cycle . period tracking apps can help you to learn more about your cycle and plan for future periods . bleeding occurs every 28 days for the majority of women but it is common for the menstrual cycle to be either shorter or longer in duration and for bleeding to start anywhere from day 21 to day 40. period length may also vary and last for 3–8 days with an average of 5 days . bleeding is often heaviest on days 1 and 2 and starts to become lighter thereafter . tracking your period can be useful for several reasons . period tracking can help you to get to know your own body and cycle and observe any symptoms such as mood swings or headaches that may occur during a particular phase of your cycle . period tracking can help to identify any changes to your menstrual cycle that may be an indicator of potential health issues . furthermore using period tracking apps can tell you when you are likely to be most fertile if you are avoiding pregnancy or trying to become pregnant . there are hundreds of apps that track and analyze the menstrual cycle so how do you know which one is the best fit for you medical news today have tried and tested apps galore to bring you a selection of the top 10 apps to start tracking your period today . period calendar android free iphone free period calendar can help to track and predict your period plus provide information on your fertile window and potential ovulation date . in addition to the basic menstrual cycle tracking function the app can be used to record temperature intercourse birth control weight cervical mucus mood and any other symptoms . the pill reminder ensures that you will never forget a dose ever again . whether you need to remember to take medications supplements birth control pills or even an injection the pill tracker can be set up to remind you . flo period tracker android free iphone free if you are wondering when you last had a period or would like to know when your next one is due you can easily find out using flo . flo uses machine learning to accurately and reliably predict menstruation and ovulation . using the apps bold and simple calendar you will be able to log how you are feeling your symptoms sex drive and menstruation flow . the app can also be used to track sleep water consumption and physical activity . the insights dashboard helps you to learn more about your body and cycle and it also provides personalized health insights each day . clue android free iphone free clue has been ranked as the top period and ovulation tracking app by the obstetrics gynecology journal which is a publication of the american college of obstetricians and gynecologists . clue uses science to help its users to identify unique patterns in their menstrual cycle . with the apps period tracker multiple mood trackers health logs and exercise trackers your health and menstrual cycle will no longer be a mystery . the developers promise to be inclusive of all ages and never use butterflies flowers euphemisms or pink . the apps unique algorithm learns from the data that you add which means that the more you use clue the smarter it will become . my calendar android free iphone free my calendar is a sophisticated elegant and very customizable period tracker . it can help those with irregular cycles as well as people who have worries about conceiving birth control and contraception . with my calendar you can track regular and irregular periods temperature weight moods symptoms and blood flow . with its discreet reminders you can be prepared for approaching periods along with ovulation and fertile days . you can access all your essential information using the health tracker at a glance and the calendar can be passwordprotected to ensure that your information remains private . glow android free iphone free glow can track your period and record your symptoms mood sexual activity and medications . glows datadriven menstrual and ovulation calculator helps women to take control of their reproductive health . the app can forecast periods and ovulation and its predictions become smarter over time . not only can the app help women who are avoiding or attempting pregnancy but it also helps those who are undergoing fertility treatments such as intrauterine insemination and in vitro fertilization . you can make charts of your menstrual and fertility data set medication birth control and ovulation reminders as well as log more than 40 different health signals . glow also offers a subscription to unlock comparative insights premium articles private messaging and premium support . eve android free iphone free eve is a savvy period tracker that predicts upcoming periods and your chances of pregnancy . discover trends in your cycle by logging your moods and symptoms and view your health data in eyecatching charts . with eve you can review past periods forecast future periods and ovulation and visualize your cycle history in a new way with eves interactive staircase . the app provides access to a community where you can discuss periods sex and health . if you are concerned about anything at all ask the community . no subject is off limits and you can learn from those who have had similar experiences . period tracker lite android free iphone free the period tracker lite app makes logging menstrual cycles quick and easy . press a button at the start of each period and period tracker lite will record your data and use the average of 3 months worth of data to calculate your next period . take notes each day about your symptoms such as flow cramps bloating backache headache and tender breasts . your weight temperature and a choice of more than 30 moods can also be selected . period dates fertility days and ovulation are all shown in a simple monthview calendar . the app provides comprehensive charts that illustrate weight changes temperature period length cycle length and symptoms . period plus iphone free period plus can help you to keep in touch with the duration of your menstrual cycles and tells you when the next one will begin . the app sends you reminders of your next period and fertile window helping you to get to know your cycle and plan ahead with birth control pregnancy planning and even vacations . period plus tracks period duration and intensity cramp intensity breast tenderness breakouts migraines basal body temperature cervical mucus sexual activity exercise pregnancy test results sleep patterns and more . my cycles android free iphone free regardless of whether you are trying to conceive or become an expert on when your next period is due my cycles can help . my cycles tracks periods in a handy calendar and predicts future ones . wherever you are you can track your period symptoms mood and medications with my cycles in an instant . record your periods view them at a glance with the easytoread calendar and plan periods fertile days and ovulation for the next 12 months . if you are trying to get pregnant the app lets you know when your chances of conceiving are higher with helpful reminders . likewise it tells you when to use extra protection if you are not trying to conceive . cycles iphone free the cycles app is a simple period and fertility tracker that requires little input . irrespective of having regular or irregular periods with cycles all you need to do is turn the dial on the first day of your period and thats it the app automatically adjusts your cycle length . cycles is designed so that you can invite your partner to the app to keep up with your cycle . this feature is useful so that your partner can provide emotional support plan trips and romantic evenings and know when your most fertile days are if you are trying to conceive . the app uses scientifically backed fertility tracking that predicts fertility with an accuracy of up to 95 percent . optional password protection keeps your information secure from prying eyes . seven tips for relieving period bloating here are some tips about how to relieve periodrelating bloating . read nowwant to get fit this year but dont know where to start we have chosen the best fitness blogs to empower you and help to get you started on your journey to tiptop physical fitness . fitness blogs aim to inspire empower and motivate you to reach your health and fitness goals . getting up off the couch and taking part in regular physical activity is one of the most important things you can do to ensure you remain healthy . regular exercise can help to control your weight strengthen your bones and muscles and reduce your risk of cardiovascular disease type 2 diabetes and some cancers . furthermore being active improves your mood mental health mobility and ability to complete tasks as an older adult as well as increases your chances of living longer . adults are recommended to do at least 150 minutes of moderateintensity physical activity each week to achieve substantial health benefits and increase to 300 minutes for more extensive benefits . if you are stuck on where to begin or are worried about getting injured the good news is that aerobic activity such as brisk walking is considered to be safe for most people . hundreds of fitness blogs are also available to help you on your way and provide tips ideas and information on the best types of activity to boost fitness and instructions on how to do them . medical news today have trawled through the many fitness blogs out there to bring you the top 10 fitness blogs for 2018. myfitnesspal blog myfitnesspal is a smartphone app and website that records physical activity and diet . the app works out the optimal intake of calories and nutrients for the user to accomplish their goals and it uses elements of gaming to motivate them . myfitnesspals blog focuses on providing easytoread information on eating psychology nutrition weight loss fitness inspiration workout guides and motivational support through the victory stories on the blog . fitness posts include seven tips to lift weights without causing injury songs that should feature on your 2018 running playlist and brain and bodyboosting moves that you should add to your next walk . visit the myfitnesspal blog . natalie jill fitness natalie jill fitness was founded after natalie jill gained weight straight after losing her house retiring and ending her marriage . she turned her life around and in the process became an inspiration to others . natalie specializes in fitness weight loss healthy lifestyles and body weight training . natalie coaches motivates and empowers people to stop making excuses and instead make solutions to become the best version of themselves . recent posts on her blog include a bootybuilding workout to activate your glutes an upper body workout using just your body weight and how to do a chin up . visit the natalie jill fitness blog . ace ace is an acronym for the american council on exercise . ace are a nonprofit organization that certifiy exercise professionals and health coaches . aces vision is to get people moving and provide scientifically backed education to fitness professionals and health enthusiasts to make an impact on preventable diseases related to inactivity by 2035. their expert articles cover fitness topics such as exercises to improve agility lower body exercises to complete instead of doing squats and the many types of strength and their benefits . visit the ace blog . born fitness adam bornstein developed born fitness with the aim of taking the stress out of health nutrition and fitness . whether you hope to lose weight gain muscle eat more healthfully or live longer born fitness provide solutions to fit your needs . the born fitness team will help you to identify the diets strategies exercises and workouts that are best suited to you so that you can apply them to your life achieve your goals and live stronger and longer . activities are available on the blog to suit all levels of fitness from beginner to advanced . training posts include how to incorporate resistance bands into your routine preventing knee back and shoulder injuries during your workouts and the truth about the 7minute workout . visit the born fitness blog . the fitnessista the fitnessista is a healthy lifestyle blog written by gina harney who is a fitness instructor personal trainer and weight loss specialist based in san diego ca . gina is a mom of two and she shares snippets of her family life on the blog along with quick effective workouts and healthful recipes that are super speedy to put together . the latest posts on the fitnessista include things to help with fitness motivation the barre hiit workout that you can practice anywhere and a strength and cardio workout that can be completed on a park bench . visit the fitnessista blog . suzanne bowen fitness suzanne bowen compiled all of the training that she had received and given over the course of 16 years and created suzanne bowen fitness . suzanne is also the creator of barreamped which is an internationally taught barre fitness technique . regardless of whether you havent exercised for a while or if you are a seasoned expert suzanne has workouts that range from 10 minutes to over an hour that are effective for everyone . the blog provides challenges and workouts to boost your fitness levels such as the crunchless abs workout a light weight routine for the upper body and a rebounding workout and its benefits . visit the suzanne bowen fitness blog . knockedup fitness erica ziel is a mother of three and the founder of knockedup fitness . erica is a personal trainer and expert for fitnessinfused pilates . with more than 10 years experience training numerous clients erica is an expert in prenatal and postnatal training and teaching women how to strengthen their core muscles for an easier pregnancy delivery and recovery . the knockedup fitness blog delivers real and relevant topics to the busy mom or momtobe with articles such as why its important to properly strengthen your core how to prevent and relieve back pain during pregnancy and how movement can prepare your body for birth . visit the knockedup fitness blog . lisa gulley established workout mommy in 2007 to provide health and fitness information for moms . lisa says that as a mom of four boys she is fully aware of how being a mom requires you to look after someone other than yourself 247 and that finding the time to exercise is a challenge . lisa aims to provide the inspiration motivation and ideas you need to fit fitness exercise and health into your busy schedule and keep your sanity in check . posts on workout mommy include ways to overcome a negative mindset tips on how to start a fitness routine and the types of cardio exercises that are best for women . visit the workout mommy blog . love sweat fitness katie dunlop is a certified personal trainer group fitness instructor and the creator of love sweat fitness . she started love sweat fitness with the aim of inspiring women all over the world to find their happy and healthy body . after college katie found herself overweight by 45 pounds and was fed up with trendy workouts and fad diets . she decided to take her fitness and health into her own hands lost her excess weight and identified her true passion for helping women to reach their goals . inspiring posts on katies blog include ways to make your morning workout the best part of your day five tips for a happier and healthier you this year and how to train for a 10k run . visit the love sweat fitness blog . nerd fitness nerd fitness say that they are a community of misfits mutants and underdogs that are ready to help you on your fitness journey . whether you are overweight and frustrated in danger of serious health issues want to become a healthier parent or just want to look after or feel better about yourself nerd fitness aim to help you to make small changes so that you can live a happier healthier and more fulfilling life . blog posts include the main differences between weight loss success and failure the number of calories you burn while walking and how to get strong like logan with the wolverine workout . visit the nerd fitness blog . the 10 best fitness apps pair these blogs with the apps listed here to boost your chances of becoming fit and healthy . read nowa new study may have revealed a possible new prevention and treatment strategy for osteoarthritis which is one of the most common and debilitating agerelated diseases in the united states . researchers suggest that increasing levels of foxo proteins could be one way to prevent and treat osteoarthritis . researchers at the scripps research institute tsri in san diego ca reveal that proteins called foxo are key for joint health . by boosting the levels of these foxo proteins they believe that it might be possible to treat osteoarthritis or even stop the disease from developing . senior study author dr. martin lotz from the department of molecular medicine at tsri and his team recently reported their results in the journal science translational medicine . osteoarthritis also referred to as degenerative joint disease is estimated to affect more than 30 million adults in the united states making it the most common type of arthritis . the condition is characterized by a breakdown of cartilage which is the tissue that cushions the joints of the bones . osteoarthritis most commonly affects the knee hip and hand joints . in a previous study dr. lotz and team found that foxo levels in joint cartilage are reduced . for this latest study the researchers sought to find out more about how foxo proteins affect joint health . the effects of foxo deficiency in mice the researchers reached their findings by studying mice that were lacking foxo proteins in their joint cartilage . compared with control mice the scientists found that foxodeficient mice experienced degeneration of the joints at a significantly younger age . what is more the rodents with foxo deficiency showed greater susceptibility to cartilage damage during a treadmill test and they were also more likely to develop posttraumatic osteoarthritis due to knee injury . osteoarthritis could this algae extract lead to a cure researchers reveal how an algae extract may offer a cure for osteoarthritis . read now upon further investigation the scientists found that the foxodeficient mice showed abnormalities in a process called autophagy which is a natural process by which cells get rid of any unwanted or damaged components in order to maintain their health and carry out any repairs . foxo deficiency also led to abnormalities in the processes that protect our cells against damage caused by free radicals . additionally the study revealed that mice lacking foxo proteins failed to produce the required levels of a protein called lubricin which helps to protect joint cartilage against wear and tear . the reduced production of lubricin was linked to a reduction in healthy cells in the `` superficial zone '' which is a layer of cartilage in the knee joint . boosting foxo may prevent osteoarthritis so why does foxo cause these issues the researchers found that foxo proteins regulate the expression of genes that are important for joint health including those that control inflammation and autophagy . the absence of foxo proteins in the joint cartilage leads to an increase in inflammation and a decrease in autophagy meaning that cells are unable to repair any damage . `` the housekeeping mechanisms which keep cells healthy were not working in these knockout mice '' says dr. lotz . for the final part of their study the scientists wanted to see whether boosting foxo levels could restore these `` housekeeping mechanisms . '' by increasing foxo expression in cells taken from people with osteoarthritis the researchers were able to normalize the expression of genes associated with inflammation and autophagy and the production of lubricin was also restored . the team now plans to create molecules that can increase foxo levels and assess their effects in experimental osteoarthritis models . `` drugs that boost the expression and activity of foxo could be a strategy for preventing and treating osteoarthritis . '' dr. martin lotzaccording to the national institutes of health people have used marijuana or cannabis to treat their ailments for at least 3000 years . however the food and drug administration have not deemed marijuana safe or effective in the treatment of any medical condition although cannabidiol a substance that is present in marijuana received approval in june 2018 as a treatment for some types of epilepsy . marijuana is being increasingly legalized in the u.s. but is it safe this tension between a widespread belief that marijuana is an effective treatment for a wide assortment of ailments and a lack of scientific knowledge on its effects has been somewhat exacerbated in recent times by a drive toward legalization . twentynine states plus the district of columbia have now made marijuana available for medical and in some states recreational purposes . a recent study published in the journal addiction also found that use of marijuana is increasing sharply across the united states although this rise may not be linked to the legalization of marijuana in participating states . nevertheless this rise in use is prompting major public health concerns . in this article we look at the scientific evidence weighing the medical benefits of marijuana against its associated health risks in an attempt to answer this simple question is marijuana good or bad what are the medical benefits of marijuana over the years research has yielded results to suggest that marijuana may be of benefit in the treatment of some conditions . these are listed below . chronic pain last year a large review from the national academies of sciences engineering and medicine assessed more than 10000 scientific studies on the medical benefits and adverse effects of marijuana . one area that the report looked closely at was the use of medical marijuana to treat chronic pain . chronic pain is a leading cause of disability affecting more than 25 million adults in the u.s. the review found that marijuana or products containing cannabinoids which are the active ingredients in marijuana or other compounds that act on the same receptors in the brain as marijuana are effective at relieving chronic pain . alcoholism and drug addiction another comprehensive review of evidence published last year in the journal clinical psychology review revealed that using marijuana may help people with alcohol or opioid dependencies to fight their addictions . but this finding may be contentious the national academies of sciences review suggests that marijuana use actually drives increased risk for abusing and becoming dependent on other substances . also the more that someone uses marijuana the more likely they are to develop a problem with using marijuana . individuals who began using the drug at a young age are also known to be at increased risk of developing a problem with marijuana use . depression posttraumatic stress disorder and social anxiety the review published in clinical psychology review assessed all published scientific literature that investigated the use of marijuana to treat symptoms of mental illness . evidence to date suggests that marijuana could help to treat some mental health conditions . its authors found some evidence supporting the use of marijuana to relieve depression and posttraumatic stress disorder symptoms . that being said they caution that marijuana is not an appropriate treatment for some other mental health conditions such as bipolar disorder and psychosis . the review indicates that there is some evidence to suggest that marijuana might alleviate symptoms of social anxiety but again this is contradicted by the national academies of sciences engineering and medicine review which instead found that regular users of marijuana may actually be at increased risk of social anxiety . cancer evidence suggests that oral cannabinoids are effective against nausea and vomiting caused by chemotherapy and some small studies have found that smoked marijuana may also help to alleviate these symptoms . alcohol more damaging to brain health than marijuana a recent study suggests that alcohol may cause more harm to the brain than marijuana . read now some studies on cancer cells suggest that cannabinoids may either slow down the growth of or kill some types of cancer . however early studies that tested this hypothesis in humans revealed that although cannabinoids are a safe treatment they are not effective at controlling or curing cancer . multiple sclerosis the shortterm use of oral cannabinoids may improve symptoms of spasticity among people with multiple sclerosis but the positive effects have been found to be modest . epilepsy in june 2018 the food and drug administration fda approved the use of a medication containing cannabidiol cbd to treat two rare severe and specific types of epilepsy called lennoxgastaut syndrome and dravet syndrome that are difficult to control with other types of medication . this cbdbased drug is known as epidiolex . cbd is one of many substances that occurs in cannabis . it is not psychoactive . the drug for treating these conditions involves a purified form of cbd . the approval was based on the findings of research and clinical trials . a study published in 2017 found that the use of cbd resulted in far fewer seizures among children with dravet syndrome compared with a placebo . dravet syndrome seizures are prolonged repetitive and potentially lethal . in fact 1 in 5 children with dravet syndrome do not reach the age of 20 years . in the study 120 children and teenagers with dravet syndrome all of whom were aged between 2 and 18 were randomly assigned to receive an oral cbd solution or a placebo for 14 weeks along with their usual medication . the researchers found that the children who received the cbd solution went from having around 12 seizures per month to an average of six seizures per month . three children receiving cbd did not experience any seizures at all . children who received the placebo also saw a reduction in seizures but this was slight their average number of seizures went down from 15 each month before the study to 14 seizures per month during the study . the researchers say that this 39 percent reduction in seizure occurrence provides strong evidence that the compound can help people living with dravet syndrome and that their paper has the first rigorous scientific data to demonstrate this . however the study also found a high rate of side effects linked to cbd . more than 9 in 10 of the children treated with cbd experienced side effects most commonly vomiting fatigue and fever . the patient information leaflet for epidiolex warns of side effects such as liver damage sedation and thoughts of suicide . what are the health risks of marijuana at the other end of the spectrum is the plethora of studies that have found negative associations between marijuana use and health . they are listed below . mental health problems daily marijuana use is believed to exacerbate existing symptoms of bipolar disorder among people who have this mental health problem . however the national academies of sciences engineering and medicine report suggests that among people with no history of the condition there is only limited evidence of a link between marijuana use and developing bipolar disorder . moderate evidence suggests that regular marijuana users are more likely to experience suicidal thoughts and there is a small increased risk of depression among marijuana users . marijuana use is likely to increase risk of psychosis including schizophrenia . but a curious finding among people with schizophrenia and other psychoses is that a history of marijuana use is linked with improved performance on tests assessing learning and memory . testicular cancer although there is no evidence to suggest any link between using marijuana and an increased risk for most cancers the national academies of sciences did find some evidence to suggest an increased risk for the slowgrowing seminoma subtype of testicular cancer . respiratory disease regular marijuana smoking is linked to increased risk of chronic cough but `` it is unclear '' whether smoking marijuana worsens lung function or increases the risk of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or asthma . a 2014 study that explored the relationship between marijuana use and lung disease suggested that it was plausible that smoking marijuana could contribute to lung cancer though it has been difficult to conclusively link the two . the authors of that study published in the journal current opinion in pulmonary medicine conclude '' there is unequivocal evidence that habitual or regular marijuana smoking is not harmless . a caution against regular heavy marijuana usage is prudent . '' `` the medicinal use of marijuana is likely not harmful to lungs in low cumulative doses '' they add `` but the dose limit needs to be defined . recreational use is not the same as medicinal use and should be discouraged . '' so is marijuana good or bad for your health there is evidence that demonstrates both the harms and health benefits of marijuana . yet despite the emergence over the past couple of years of very comprehensive uptodate reviews of the scientific studies evaluating the benefits and harms of the drug its clear that more research is needed to fully determine the public health implications of rising marijuana use . more research is needed to confirm the harms and benefits of marijuana use . many scientists and health bodies including the american cancer society acs support the need for further scientific research on the use of marijuana and cannabinoids to treat medical conditions . however there is an obstacle to this marijuana is classed as a schedule i controlled substance by the drug enforcement administration which deters the study of marijuana and cannabinoids through its imposition of strict conditions on the researchers working in this area . if you happen to live in a state where medical use of marijuana is legal you and your doctor will need to carefully consider these factors and how they relate to your illness and health history before using this drug . for instance while there is some evidence to support the use for marijuana for pain relief you should certainly avoid marijuana if you have a history of mental health problems . remember to always speak to your doctor before taking a new medicine .with so many diet types to choose from how do we know which one will suit us best one problem that may face us is deciding whether to go lowfat or lowcarb . what does research have to say about it one of the most difficult decisions when it comes to weight loss diets is picking one that will work well for you . keto diets mediterranean diets fasting diets there are so many options out there for people who want to lose weight . however choosing a diet is tricky how do we know which one will work best for us or if the diet will work at all researchers at the stanford university school of medicine in california have recently conducted a study exploring one key aspect of this `` best diet '' question whether lowfat or lowcarb diets are more effective . what lead study author prof. christopher gardner and colleagues found however might only make the matter more complicated . `` weve all heard stories '' says prof. gardner `` of a friend who went on one diet it worked great and then another friend tried the same diet and it didnt work at all . its because were all very different and were just starting to understand the reasons for this diversity . '' `` maybe we shouldnt be asking whats the best diet but whats the best diet for whom '' prof. christopher gardner prof. gardner and team worked with 609 people aged 18–50 with an almost 5050 maletofemale ratio . the participants were split into two groups and randomly assigned one of two diets lowcarb or lowfat . all of the study participants followed their assigned diet for a full year . the results of the researchers study are now published in the journal jama . opt for natural foods in order to gain a better understanding of the factors that might drive weight gain and weight loss prof. gardner and team also sequenced the participants genomes . in doing so they looked for gene patterns that they could associate with the effectiveness fat or carb metabolism . another test measured all the subjects insulin levels which have previously been associated with weight gain in some people . cant keep the weight off this may be why why are our bodies so stubborn when it comes to weight management a new study sheds light . read now for the first 8 weeks of their respective diets the participants were instructed to consume no more than 20 grams of either fats or carbs per day . this the authors explain would be the equivalent of one and a half slices of wholewheat bread for carbs or a large handful of nuts in the case of fats . from the second month of their diet onward the participants were allowed to make adjustments as needed adding back 5 –15 grams of either carbs or fat little by little . the purpose of these adjustments was to encourage the participants to strike a nutritional balance that they would be comfortable adhering to in the long run beyond the `` confines '' of the study . `` we wanted them to choose '' says prof. gardner `` a lowfat or lowcarb diet plan that they could potentially follow forever rather than a diet that theyd drop when the study ended . '' as the year drew to a close those who had been following a lowfat diet had a daily fat intake of 57 grams on average compared with 87 grams per day before the start of the study . those on a lowcarb diet had a daily carb intake of approximately 132 grams versus 247 grams before the study started . participants lost an average of 13 pounds over the 1year period . the scientists were pleased with the impact that the study had on the participants dietary health stressing that one of its main achievements was to encourage them to switch to healthful sources of fats and carbs . `` we made sure to tell everybody '' adds prof. gardner `` regardless of which diet they were on to go to the farmers market and dont buy processed convenience food . also we advised them to diet in a way that didnt make them feel hungry or deprived . '' study opens the door to further questions after measuring participants baseline insulin levels and weight loss progress throughout the study the researchers saw that although they had all transitioned to more healthful eating habits there was still a lot of individual variance when it came to weight loss . thus while some participants lost more than 60 pounds others gained 15–20 pounds . however the researchers were unable to find any links between gene patterns or insulin output and a persons likelihood of thriving on a lowfat versus lowcarb diet . `` this study closes the door on some questions but it opens the door to others . we have gobs of data that we can use in secondary exploratory studies '' prof. gardner notes . the researchers next step from here therefore will be to look at all the different data collected throughout the current study and try to understand how individual dietary needs might be calculated in the future . `` i still think there is an opportunity to discover some personalization to it now we just need to work on tying the pieces together '' says prof. gardner . in the meantime the researchers encourage people on a weight loss journey to just be more mindful about what they eat since that will be the first step to a more healthful lifestyle . `` on both sides referring to lowcarb and lowfat dieters we heard from people who had lost the most weight that we had helped them change their relationship to food and that now they were more thoughtful about how they ate '' prof. gardner concludes .intermittent fasting has been gaining popularity among people looking to shed extra kilograms and maintain a healthy weight . researchers argue that this type of diet may also slow down aging and disease . intermittent fasting can help with weight management but might it also bring other health benefits in intermittent fasting what essentially takes place in the body is that one source of energy which can facilitate the accumulation of body fat is switched for another . our bodies run on glucose or simple sugar but when we fast for a longer period of time that energy source becomes unavailable . our system needs to identify a different kind of `` fuel . '' that is when the body begins to convert certain types of body fat into fatty acids which are easily absorbed by the blood . fatty acids in turn produce molecules called ketones which the body uses as its new source of energy . stephen anton a researcher at the university of florida college of medicine in gainesville calls this process `` flipping the metabolic switch . '' `` this switch '' explains anton `` can happen after a certain period of time fasting . its a gradation in which your metabolism over time shifts to use higher and higher amounts of ketones for energy . '' he and his team were interested to learn more about how this switch occurs and whether it could bring other health benefits alongside weight management . for this purpose they reviewed numerous recent studies focused on the mechanisms and benefits of intermittent fasting . the teams review published in the journal obesity suggests that intermittent fasting may be more healthful than other dieting strategies as ketones put less stress on cells than the byproducts of other dieting styles . significant weight loss regardless of style anton and his colleagues explain that the switch usually begins to take place after 8–12 hours of fasting though in the case of individuals who practice intermittent fasting the fasting strategies vary . the researchers focused on the two most common types of intermittent fasting diets the first of which is based on time restrictions for eating . in it the dieter may fast for a number of hours per day for instance 16 hours while allowing themselves to eat anything theyd like over the remaining hours . how intermittent fasting can increase weight loss how does intermittent fasting work read now for the second type of intermittent fasting dieters may choose to alternate days of total fasting with days when no food is off limits . or they may simply alternate days of frugal eating when individuals limit themselves to foods that equal only about 500 calories in all with days of unrestricted eating or `` feasting days . '' `` of course '' anton notes `` we recommend healthy food during the feasting times . '' the teams review of existing studies revealed that all in all any type of intermittent fasting diets are associated with significant weight loss . in all 10 clinical trials assessing the effects of alternateday fasting the results conclusively pointed to this strategys effectiveness when it came to shedding extra kilos . and 3 out of the 4 studies focused on the restricted timing type of intermittent fasting had similar results . `` so in my mind its not a question of whether it works for producing fat loss '' says anton . whats more interesting and more important is what kind of tissue is lost through intermittent fasting . additional potential health benefits most of the studies reviewed by anton and team revealed that while participants did lose body fat no significant amount of lean tissue which includes organ tissue muscular tissue and bone tissue was lost . this is important since lean tissue allows our bodies to keep on functioning well and other types of dieting strategies anton notes lead to significant loss of both fat and lean tissue which may affect health in the long run . studies into the effect of the switch from glucosedriven energy to ketonedriven energy in rodents and other animals suggests that intermittent fasting could also have other health benefits the scientists say . the researchers say that it could help to prolong the lifespan improve the functioning of metabolic processes protect cognitive function enhance physical performance reduce harmful instances of inflammation and shield against cardiovascular diseases . `` an important takeaway is that we all have the ability to switch our metabolism from glucose to ketone utilization . and that switch has the potential to have profound health benefits for us in addition to the positive changes in body composition . '' stephen anton still the authors warn against starting intermittent fasting without first asking for a doctors advice . this dieting style may not be equally beneficial for everyone and in some cases it could do more harm than good he cautions .emerging evidence suggests that a `` potent '' drug could prevent the development of alzheimers disease but only if a person takes the medication long before symptoms of this condition make an appearance . an existing drug may be able to stop alzheimers onset researchers say . alzheimers disease is the most common form of dementia according to the centers for disease control and prevention cdc an estimated 5.7 million adults in the united states live with this condition . unfortunately there is no cure for alzheimers and following disease onset symptoms tend to worsen progressively . then the question `` can specialists prevent the disease in people deemed at increased risk '' arises . the authors of a new study from the university of virginia in charlottesville suggest that one drug called memantine which is currently used to manage alzheimers symptoms may actually help prevent the disease . this however might only happen if a person takes the drug before symptoms set in . `` based on what weve learned so far it is my opinion that we will never be able to cure alzheimers disease by treating patients once they become symptomatic '' says prof. george bloom of the university of virginia who oversaw the study . `` the best hope for conquering this disease is to first recognize patients who are at risk and begin treating them prophylactically with new drugs and perhaps lifestyle adjustments that would reduce the rate at which the silent phase of the disease progresses '' he says adding `` ideally we would prevent it from starting in the first place . '' the journal alzheimers dementia has now published the teams findings . the cell cycle reentry process the researchers explain that alzheimers disease actually begins long before symptoms start to show perhaps even a decade or longer in advance . one of the conditions characteristics is that once affected by the disease brain cells attempt to divide possibly in order to balance out the death of other neurons only to die anyway . in any case the further division of fully formed brain cells is unusual and does not happen in a healthy brain . the affected neurons attempt at division is called the `` cell cycle reentry process . '' `` its been estimated that as much as 90 percent of neuron death that occurs in the alzheimers brain follows this cell cycle reentry process which is an abnormal attempt to divide '' explains prof. bloom . more potent alzheimers therapy is on its way recent advances in alzheimers research are speeding up the process of designing better therapies . read now '' by the end of the course of the disease the patient will have lost about 30 percent of the neurons in the frontal lobes of the brain '' he estimates . study coauthor erin kodis prof. blooms former doctoral student formed her own hypothesis about what triggers this mechanism . excess calcium she believes enters neurons through special receptors called nmda receptors on the cells surface . this drives brain cells to start dividing . following a series of laboratory experiments kodis confirmed that her hypothesis was correct . this mechanism is set in motion before the formation of amyloid plaques which are characteristic of alzheimers disease in the brain . eventually however molecules of an amino acid called beta amyloid stick together to form toxic amyloid plaques . memantine may have potent properties kodis saw that when neurons encounter beta amyloid molecules in the early stages that precede plaque buildup nmda receptors open to receive the excess calcium that ultimately leads to their destruction . but then the researcher made another discovery the drug memantine prevented cell cycle reentry by closing the nmda receptors on the surface of neurons . `` the experiments suggest that memantine might have potent diseasemodifying properties if it could be administered to patients long before they have become symptomatic and diagnosed with alzheimers disease . '' prof. george bloom '' perhaps this could prevent the disease or slow its progression long enough that the average age of symptom onset could be significantly later if it happens at all '' prof. bloom adds . these findings are particularly promising memantine has few known side effects and those that have been reported are rare and do not have a major impact on an individuals wellbeing . prof. bloom believes that in the future a useful preventive approach might be to screen people for telling signs that they are exposed to alzheimers as early as possible . specialists could then prescribe memantine to those at an increased risk of the disease he says . people may have to take the drug throughout their lives to keep alzheimers at bay or at least in check . `` i dont want to raise false hopes '' says prof. bloom . however he continues `` if this idea of using memantine as a prophylactic pans out it will be because we now understand that calcium is one of the agents that gets the disease started and we may be able to stop or slow the process if done very early . '' currently prof. bloom and colleagues are planning a clinical trial to test the preventive strategy that they outlined in the study .for many cancers diagnosis is a long and challenging process . a new blood test however could offer a muchneeded simpler and more effective diagnostic technique . called cancerseek it has the potential to identify eight cancer types from one blood sample . researchers have created a blood test that could detect eight cancer types . in the new study researchers reveal how the blood test demonstrated high sensitivity and specificity for cancer detection in more than 1000 people with the disease . the team from the johns hopkins university school of medicine in baltimore md recently published their results in the journal science . worldwide cancer remains one of the leading causes of death . it is estimated that by 2030 the number of cancer deaths will have risen from 8 million to 13 million . early diagnosis is key to reducing cancerrelated deaths the earlier the disease is diagnosed the higher the chances of treatment success . but sadly many cancers are not caught until the later stages and this is largely due to a lack of fast and effective diagnostic tools . however the johns hopkins researchers believe that cancerseek could bring us closer to a quick simple way to detect cancer in its early stages . test produced high sensitivity and specificity when cancerous tumors form they release small fragments of mutated dna and proteins into the bloodstream and these can act as markers for cancer . the new blood test works by identifying the markers for 16 gene mutations and eight proteins that are associated with eight different cancer types . these include breast lung and colorectal cancer as well as five cancers ovarian liver stomach pancreatic and esophageal for which there are currently no routine screening tests for people at average risk . `` a novelty of our classification method is that it combines the probability of observing various dna mutations together with the levels of several proteins in order to make the final call '' explains study coauthor cristian tomasetti ph.d. an associate professor of oncology and biostatistics at johns hopkins university . how gum disease could lead to cancer researchers shed light on how gum disease can fuel cancer . read now for their study the researchers tested cancerseek on 1005 individuals who had been diagnosed with nonmetastatic forms of one of the eight cancers . they found that the test was able to identify 70 percent of the cancers with sensitivity ranging from 33 percent for breast cancer to 98 percent for ovarian cancer . sensitivity ranged from 69 percent to 98 percent for the five cancers that currently have no routine screening tests the researchers report . in terms of specificity the test yielded an overall result of more than 99 percent . on testing cancerseek on 812 healthy adults it only produced seven falsepositive results . as study coauthor kenneth kinzler ph.d. codirector of the ludwig center for cancer genetics and therapeutics at johns hopkins notes `` very high specificity was essential because falsepositive results can subject patients to unnecessary invasive followup tests and procedures to confirm the presence of cancer . '' what is more the researchers found that their test was able to pinpoint the location of tumors for 83 percent of patients . test could substantially impact patients the researchers note that larger studies will now be needed to further determine the efficacy of cancerseek as a routine screening test for cancer and such studies are in the pipeline . however the team believes that the results of its current research are encouraging . `` this has the potential to substantially impact patients . earlier detection provides many ways to improve outcomes for patients '' says study coauthor dr. anne marie lennon ph.d. who is an associate professor of medicine surgery and radiology at johns hopkins . `` optimally cancers would be detected early enough that they could be cured by surgery alone but even cancers that are not curable by surgery alone will respond better to systemic therapies when there is less advanced disease '' she adds . the team hopes that cancerseek will one day offer a simple noninvasive and fast strategy for diagnosing cancer in its early stages . `` this test represents the next step in changing the focus of cancer research from late stage disease to early disease which i believe will be critical to reducing cancer deaths in the longterm . '' study coauthor dr. bert vogelstein johns hopkins university school of medicinethey are usually marketed as a safe alternative to conventional cigarettes but a new study suggests that ecigarettes may still pose serious harm to health . researchers suggest that ecigarettes may increase the risk of cancer and heart disease . researchers at the new york university school of medicine in new york city found that mice exposed to electronic cigaratte ecigarette vapor experienced dna damage in the lungs bladder and heart which could increase the risk of cancer and heart disease . such damage was also found in cultured human lung and bladder cells that had been exposed to ecigarette vapor for the equivalent of 10 years . study coauthor moonshong tang of the department of environmental medicine at the new york university school of medicine and his colleagues recently reported their findings in the proceedings of the national academy of sciences . ecigarettes also known as ecigs have soared in popularity in recent years particularly among teenagers and young adults . according to the centers for disease control and prevention cdc more than 2 million middle and high school students in the united states report having used ecigarettes in the past 30 days . ecigarettes are not approved by the food and drug administration fda as a quitsmoking aid after the u.s. preventive services task force concluded that there is `` insufficient evidence to recommend for or against their use for smoking cessation . '' however research has found that more than 80 percent of smokers believe that ecigarettes could help them to quit while more than 97 percent believe that the batterypowered devices can help to reduce the use of conventional tobacco . the debate over ecigarette safety when it comes to our health the cdc believe that ecigarettes are not as harmful as conventional ones . still because ecigarettes are relatively new to the market precisely how harmful they are remains unclear . that said we are learning more and more about the potential dangers of ecigarette use or `` vaping . '' the pros and cons of ecigarettes revealed a new report details the potential benefits and risks of ecigarette use . read now in 2017 medical news today reported on a study that linked the flavorings in ecigarette liquid to impaired heart muscle function . a more recent report claims that there is `` substantial evidence '' that ecigarette use increases heart rate and that some chemicals in the vapor can harm dna . the study by tang and team provides further evidence of the harms of ecigarettes after finding that exposure to ecigarette vapor can damage dna in a way that could cause cancer and heart disease . ecigarette vapor caused dna damage the researchers came to their findings by exposing 10 male mice to ecigarette vapor containing 10 milligrams of nicotine which is comparable with what humans inhale for 3 hours per day 5 days per week for 12 weeks . when compared with a control group of mice that inhaled filtered air they found that the mice exposed to ecigarette vapor showed dna damage in their heart lungs and bladder . what is more the scientists found that exposure to ecigarette vapor halted dna repair processes in the lung tissue of mice . they found the same outcomes when testing longterm exposure to ecigarette vapor on human lung and bladder cells . in conclusion to their findings tang and colleagues write '' based on these results we propose that ecs ecigarette smoke is carcinogenic and that ecig smokers have a higher risk than nonsmokers to develop lung and bladder cancer and heart diseases . '' critics of the research however claim that this study does not prove that ecigarettes are harmful to health . talking to the guardian peter hajek the director of the tobacco dependence research unit at queen mary university of london in the united kingdom says that the `` study shows nothing at all about the dangers of vaping . '' he continues saying `` it doesnt show that vaping causes cancer . this is one in a long line of false alarms which may be putting people off the switch from smoking to vaping which would undoubtedly be of great benefit to them . '' it seems that the jury is out on whether or not vaping can cause cancer and heart disease but one thing is clear more studies are needed to find out .breaking research concludes that the use of two existing drugs could successfully treat certain lung cancers . the study delves deep into the molecular survival kit of lung tumors . understanding how lung tumors survive and grow leads to an innovative new treatment . lung cancer is now the leading cause of cancer death in the united states responsible for almost 160000 deaths each year . many are driven by the kras oncogene . kras is an essential gene but in its mutant form it is an important step in the generation of many types of cancer . for over 30 years the kras oncogene has been a focus of research . finding a way to remove its teeth would be pivotal in the treatment of a range of cancers . as part of this effort rather than targeting the gene directly some scientists have focused on pathways that are related to the errant gene . one pathway of interest centers on insulin and insulinlike growth factor1 igf1 . this pathway helps to regulate the uptake of nutrients into the cell providing it with the energy and raw ingredients it needs to grow . if the tumor cells fuel supply could be severed its onward march might be halted . however it is not clear whether kras oncogenes are reliant on this particular pathway and in clinical trials results have not been encouraging . in fact one study in mice found that lung tumors actually became more aggressive after the pathway was suppressed . attacking krasrelated pathways undeterred a team from the boston childrens hospital in massachusetts used a fresh approach . in the mouse study mentioned above the insulinigf1 signaling pathway was only partially closed off . in the latest study though a genetic technique was used that shut it down entirely . to do this the scientists crossed two strains of genetically modified mice . the first is a wellused model for krasdriven lung cancer and the other is a mouse used to study diabetes that lacks insulinigf1 signaling . in the diabetes mouse model the insulinigf1 pathway is unshackled by the deletion of two genes irs1 and irs2 . these encode `` adaptor '' proteins which are essential for the smooth running of the insulinigf1 pathway . `` our study uses a robust way to block insulinigf1 signaling and addresses a longstanding question in krasmutant lung cancer . when you use genetics results can be more conclusive . '' senior study author nada kalaany ph.d an assistant professor at harvard medical school boston ma using their new model the scientists demonstrated that by suppressing the two adaptor proteins insulinigf1 signaling is blocked and lung tumors are significantly suppressed '' almost all animals in this lung cancer model typically die within 15 weeks of kras activation '' says kalaany . `` but the ones that lost both irs1 and irs2 were completely fine we saw almost no tumors at 10 to 15 weeks . '' this finding is important because drugs that block insulinigf1 signaling are already in use and freely available . the results are published this week in the proceedings of the national academy of sciences . while the preliminary findings are hopeful the researchers knew that there was more work to be done cancer is a complex evermorphing disease with a terrifying knack for circumventing medical interventions . outfoxing lung cancer to observe whether the cancer cells were able to navigate around this new roadblock the team let the animals live longer to see what happened next . as kalaany explains `` sure enough at around 16 weeks we started seeing some tumors . so then we asked how were these tumor cells able to overcome loss of irs1 and irs2 '' how lung cancer cells disguise themselves to evade chemo by adopting the traits of cells from other major organs lung cancer cells can escape chemotherapy . read now the answer was found in the levels of essential cellular building blocks amino acids . tumor cells lacking the adaptor proteins failed to move amino acids into their cells despite a plentiful supply outside of the cell . `` growth factors like igf1 tell cells that nutrients are around '' says kalaany `` so when you suppress their signaling the tumor cells dont take up the amino acids and think they are starved . '' `` but we found that the tumor cells can compensate for this and break down their own proteins to generate amino acids . '' so the krasdriven tumors threw out a curve ball they had once again figured out a workaround . by breaking themselves down in a process known as autophagy they can generate the raw material they need to thrive . the researchers however were one step ahead . heading cancer off at the pass drugs that inhibit protein breakdown are already available . these include chloroquine which is currently involved in a number of cancer drug trials and bortezomib which blocks proteasomes proteindigesting structures and is already used to treat myeloma . when the two prongs of the attack were combined the results were more than encouraging . they found that tumor cells lacking irs1 and irs2 did not grow well and when the inhibitors were added growth stopped almost completely . additional studies will now be needed to understand how these two drug types might interact in a patient . however this is a considerable breakthrough and the researchers are excited to take it to the next phase . `` our work tries to identify metabolic dependencies and vulnerabilities in tumors '' says kalaany . `` if we identify collaborators we would love to have a clinical trial in nonsmallcell lung cancer combining igf1 inhibitors with autophagy inhibitors or proteasome inhibitors . '' by testing to breaking point every part of a tumor cells survival kit researchers will one day beat cancer .high blood pressure or hypertension is a major risk factor for heart disease the leading cause of death in the united states . but a new study has found that two classes of medication that are commonly used to lower blood pressure could present a death risk all on their own . researchers have identified two blood pressure drugs that could raise mortality risk . scientists at the intermountain medical center heart institute in salt lake city ut found that individuals with hypertension who used alpha blockers and alpha2 agonists to control their blood pressure showed an increase in blood pressure variability which could increase mortality risk . lead study author dr. brian clements and team have recently presented their findings at the 2018 american college of cardiology acc scientific sessions held in orlando fl . blood pressure is the force of blood that pushes against the wall of the arteries . and in november last year the american heart association aha and the acc set new guidelines . now a person is considered to have hypertension if their systolic blood pressure the top number is 130 millimeters of mercury mmhg or higher and their diastolic blood pressure the bottom number is 80 mmhg or higher . systolic blood pressure is the force of blood against the artery walls when the heart is beating while diastolic blood pressure is the force of blood when the heart is at rest or between heartbeats . the updated guidelines mean that almost half of adults in the united states have high blood pressure which puts them at greater risk of heart attack stroke and heart disease among other health problems . of course when it comes to treating hypertension the goal is to lower blood pressure . this may be achieved through lifestyle changes such as adopting a healthful diet and increasing physical activity medication or both . previous research however has discovered that consistency is key for blood pressure levels . a study published in the bmj in 2016 for example associated higher variability of systolic blood pressure with a 15 percent increase in allcause mortality . according to the new study from dr. clements and colleagues certain types of medication that are used to lower blood pressure may be contributing to this mortality risk . two medications should be avoided for their study the researchers analyzed the data of over 10500 adults with high blood pressure . the participants had their blood pressure measured at least seven times between january 2007 and december 2011 and the type of blood pressure medication they were using was monitored . common blood pressure drug raises skin cancer risk researchers reveal how a blood pressure medication may increase the risk of skin cancer . read now the team used these data to assess whether certain classes of blood pressure medication were associated with variability in blood pressure levels . the study revealed two classes of blood pressure medication that were linked to higher blood pressure variability in subjects alpha blockers and alpha2 agonists . alpha blockers which include doxazosin mesylate and prazosin hydrochloride work by dilating the blood vessels . alpha2 agonists such as methyldopa work by targeting sympathetic nervous system activity thereby reducing blood vessel constriction . based on the study results dr. clements and colleagues say that these two medications should not be used to treat hypertension . `` patients should know what their blood pressure is '' he says `` and if its up and down all the time the patient should work with their physician to explore options for the best blood pressure medications that will reduce variances . '' `` where possible the two types of medications that show an increase in variances should be avoided . '' dr. brian clements dr. clements adds that ace inhibitors angiotensin receptor blockers calcium channel blockers and thiazide diuretics may be safer treatment options for people with hypertension . `` people who are on other types of blood pressure medications have an increased risk of death '' he adds . however blood pressure variability is not solely down to medication dr. clements notes that the way in which blood pressure is measured can have a significant effect on readings . `` ... because of the variables that affect blood pressure measurements '' says dr. clements `` finding ways to more accurately measure blood pressure can better identify effective treatments for patients who have hypertension . '' for accurate blood pressure readings he recommends sitting or laying down for 15 minutes before measurements are taken . avoiding stressful situations and using a wellfitting blood pressure cuff may also help .a new study reveals that individuals with higher levels of belly fat and larger waistlines are more likely to have lower vitamin d levels . where fat is stored on the body may impact vitamin d levels . currently in medical circles vitamin d is the talk of the town . produced in our skin on contact with sunlight it plays a myriad of roles in the human body . in the past few months medical news today have covered a wealth of research into the group of fatsoluble secosteroids more commonly known as vitamin d. for instance recent studies have found that vitamin d might protect against heart failure diabetes and cancer and that vitamin d deficiency causes hair loss . vitamin d deficiency has traditionally been linked to bone health but it may also have a role to play in respiratory tract infections and autoimmune disease among others . with more than 40 percent of the population of the united states being vitamin d deficient this is a serious issue . some authors have referred to it as `` an ignored epidemic '' estimating that over 1 billion people worldwide have inadequate levels . vitamin d and belly fat exposed they discovered that in women both total and abdominal fat were associated with lower vitamin d levels but that abdominal fat had the greatest impact . in men however lower vitamin d levels were significantly linked with fat in the liver and abdomen . across both sexes more belly fat predicted lower levels of vitamin d. rafiq explains `` the strong relationship between increasing amounts of abdominal fat and lower levels of vitamin d suggests that individuals with larger waistlines are at a greater risk of developing deficiency and should consider having their vitamin d levels checked . '' her next step is to understand why this relationship exists . does a deficiency in vitamin d cause fat to be stored in the abdominal region or does belly fat decrease levels of vitamin d it will take more work to tease apart cause and effect . as rafiq explains `` due to the observational nature of this study we can not draw a conclusion on the direction or cause of the association between obesity and vitamin d levels . '' `` however this strong association may point to a possible role for vitamin d in abdominal fat storage and function . '' rachida rafiq the links between obesity and vitamin d deficiency are growing increasingly robust . the next challenge is working out a way to effectively tackle this issue .baking soda has been used as a home remedy for generations due to its antacid properties . yet its benefits run even deeper and new research may explain why it is an effective aid in the treatment of autoimmune diseases such as arthritis . how can this kitchen staple change the bodys inflammatory response baking soda also called sodium bicarbonate is a kitchen staple commonly used as a raising agent for cakes . that being said it has also made a name for itself as a home remedy for various conditions . half a teaspoon of baking soda is often taken to ease heartburn or acid reflux for example and this substance is also used to whiten teeth . in a new study whose findings are now published in the journal of immunology researchers from the medical college of georgia at augusta university reveal exactly how drinking a solution of baking soda could prime the immune system against inflammatory diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis . paul oconnor a renal physiologist at augusta university and colleagues tested the effects that drinking a baking soda solution would have first on rats and then on humans . their experiments tell a complex story about how this salt provides a signal to a special kind of cell called `` mesothelial cells '' telling them that the body is fine and not under attack rendering an aggressive immune system unnecessary . thus harmful autoimmune responses are averted . baking soda and mesothelial cells mesothelial cells line the internal organs as well as many different cavities in the body . not only do they prevent organs and other internal tissue from sticking together they also serve other functions not all of which have been studied in detail . in the new study oconnor and team tested the effect that a baking soda solution would have first on rats and then on healthy human participants and they noted that it influenced an intriguing mechanism . can this biochemical switch off inflammation researchers may have found a way to `` switch off '' certain immune cells when necessary . read now baking soda `` prompts '' the stomach to produce more gastric acid which allows it to digest food quicker and easier . but in addition to this it also seems to tell the mesothelial cells that line the spleen to `` take it easy '' because there is no threat . basically in oconnor words mesothelial cells learn that `` its most likely a hamburger not a bacterial infection . '' so they in turn do not activate the spleens `` army '' of macrophages or white blood cells tasked with clearing up potentially harmful cellular detritus . `` certainly drinking bicarbonate affects the spleen and we think its through the mesothelial cells '' oconnor explains . mesothelial cells communicate with the organs they line using small projections called microvilli and the medium through which they send their message is the neurotransmitter acetylcholine . from inflammatory to antiinflammatory so what actually happens the study authors note that those who drank the baking soda solution experienced a shift in the kinds of immune cells activated in the spleen . in fact proinflammatory macrophages m1 dwindled in number while the levels of antiinflammatory cells m2 rose . the same kinds of cells are also housed in the blood and kidneys and baking soda happens to be used in the treatment of chronic kidney disease . this idea prompted the new studys authors to explore the mechanisms through which this substance might help to improve renal function . `` we started thinking how does baking soda slow progression of kidney disease '' says oconnor . at first the researchers analyzed the effects of the baking soda solution on a rat model of kidney disease and then again on healthy rats which acted as the control sample . this is when the researchers noticed that the levels of m1 cells in the kidneys dropped while those of m2 cells increased . both the rats with kidney disease and the healthy rats presented the same development . and it was this shift that flagged up the notion that baking soda could influence the inflammatory response at cellular level . when the researchers recruited healthy medical students and asked them to drink the baking soda solution it became apparent the antiinflammatory effect of this substance happened in the spleen as well as in the blood . `` the shift from inflammatory to an antiinflammatory profile is happening everywhere . we saw it in the kidneys we saw it in the spleen now we see it in the peripheral blood . '' paul oconnor safe way to treat inflammatory disease one of the authors main revelations was the fact that it was the mesothelial cells that mediated the antiinflammatory signals . an existing working theory had been that signals were transmitted to the relevant cells through the vagus nerve a long cranial nerve that communicates with the heart lungs and various organs in the abdomen . but experiments revealed that this idea was incorrect . when the scientists tried cutting off this nerve this did not affect the behavior of the mesothelial cells . instead it became apparent that these cells had a more direct communication with the organs they lined than previously thought . oconnor and his team became aware of this when they noted that moving the spleen affected mesothelial cells that lined it and the signals modulating the inflammatory response were lost . `` we think the cholinergic acetylcholine signals that we know mediate this antiinflammatory response arent coming directly from the vagal nerve innervating the spleen but from the mesothelial cells that form these connections to the spleen '' explains oconnor . the results begin to provide an answer as to why baking soda can help with autoimmune diseases including arthritis and further research into these mechanisms could help to optimize the results obtained through this common compound . `` its potentially a really safe way to treat inflammatory disease '' oconnor concludes .anxiety disorders are common across the united states thought to affect around 40 million adults each year . however as if these feelings of worry and fear arent enough to contend with a new study suggests that older people who have worsening anxiety symptoms may be more likely to develop alzheimers disease . researchers have linked increasing anxiety symptoms in older age to higher levels of a protein linked to alzheimers . researchers found that increasing symptoms of anxiety were linked to higher levels of betaamyloid which is a protein associated with alzheimers disease in the brains of older people with normal cognitive functioning . first study author dr. nancy donovan who is a geriatric psychiatrist at brigham and womens hospital in boston ma and team say that the results suggest that a rise in the sypmtoms of anxiety could be an early sign of alzheimers . the findings were recently published in the american journal of psychiatry . alzheimers disease is a form of dementia characterized by problems with memory and thinking as well as changes in behavior . it is estimated that around 5.5 million people in the u.s. are living with alzheimers of whom around 5.4 million are over the age of 65. the precise causes of alzheimers disease remain unclear but scientists believe that betaamyloid plays a key role . this is a protein that can form `` plaques '' which have been found to block nerve cell communication in the brains of people with alzheimers . these plaques are considered to be a hallmark of the disease and research has suggested that an increase in betaamyloid levels can occur up to 10 years before the onset of alzheimers symptoms . according to the new study anxiety could play a significant role in increased betaamyloid levels among older adults . targeting anxiety may slow alzheimers previous studies have suggested that depression and anxiety might be indicators of alzheimers since symptoms of these mental health conditions often occur in the early stages of the disease . for their study dr. donovan and colleagues sought to determine whether or not betaamyloid might play a role in this association . alzheimers tripleaction diabetes drug shows promise as treatment researchers reveal how a diabetes drug could help to treat alzheimers . read now the research included 270 adults between age 62 and 90 with normal cognitive functioning all of whom underwent positron emission tomography at study baseline and annually during 5 years of followup in order to determine levels of betaamyloid in their brains . symptoms of anxiety and depression among the adults were assessed using the 30item geriatric depression scale . it was found that adults who showed an increase in anxiety symptoms over 5 years of followup also had higher levels of betaamyloid in their brains . the researchers say that this indicates that worsening anxiety might be an early sign of alzheimers disease . `` if further research substantiates anxiety as an early indicator it would be important for not only identifying people early on with the disease but also treating it and potentially slowing or preventing the disease process early on . '' dr. nancy donovan the scientists point out that followup studies are required to determine whether older adults who experience an increase in anxiety symptoms actually go on to develop alzheimers .new results could change the face of alzheimers treatment the herpes simplex virus is found to play a vital role in the condition and antiherpetic medication is shown to have a dramatic effect on dementia risk . alzheimers disease may soon be treated with antiviral medication . last month medical news today reported on a study that found `` strong evidence '' that viruses are involved in alzheimers disease . the postmortem analyses of brain tissue found that people who lived with this dementia type also had more herpesviruses 6 and 7 than people without alzheimers . now a scientific commentary suggests that the study that mnt covered is not the only one to pinpoint a link between herpes and dementia . in fact three more studies have strengthened this link and the commentary recently published in the journal of alzheimers disease – takes a look at all three . ruth itzhaki who is a professor of neuroscience and experimental psychology at the university of manchester in the united kingdom alongside richard lathe who is a professor in the division of infection and pathway medicine at the university of edinburgh also in the u.k. authored the commentary . remarkable magnitude of antiviral effect the studies referenced in the commentary are two articles tsai et al . 2017 and chen et al . 2018 that suggest that acute herpes zoster infection puts people at a higher risk of dementia and one article that shows that aggressive treatment with antiherpetic medication drastically lowers dementia risk . the latter study deemed `` most important '' by profs . itzhaki and lathe examined 8362 people aged 50 and above who received a diagnosis of herpes simplex virus hsv infection as well as a control group of 25086 agematched healthy people . breakthrough researchers fix alzheimers gene by correcting the faulty apoe4 gene researchers were able to erase its damaging effects on the brain . read now the two groups were followed for almost a decade between 2001 and 2010. in the herpes group the risk of dementia was over 2.5 times higher than in the control group . significantly the study also revealed that aggressive antiviral treatment reduced the relative risk of dementia by 10 times . prof. lathe comments on these new findings saying `` not only is the magnitude of the antiviral effect remarkable but also the fact that despite the relatively brief duration and the timing of treatment in most patients severely affected by hsv1 it appeared to prevent the longterm damage in the brain that results in alzheimers . '' `` this article and two others ... provide the first population evidence for a causal link between herpes virus infection and alzheimers disease a hugely important finding . '' prof. ruth itzhaki '' i believe we are the first to realize the implications of these striking data on this devastating condition which principally affects the elderly '' prof. itzhaki adds . `` but '' she says `` we believe that these safe and easily available antivirals may have a strong part to play in combating the disease in these patients . '' she also suggests that in the future it may be possible to prevent the disease `` by vaccination against the virus in infancy . '' `` successful treatment by a specific drug or successful vaccination against the putative microbe are the only ways to prove that a microbe is the cause of a noninfectious human disease '' says prof. itzhaki .with marijuana legalization on the rise an increasing number of studies are exploring the drugs potential harms and benefits . however a new study suggests that when it comes to brain health alcohol is more damaging . researchers say that alcohol causes more damage to the brain than marijuana does . scientists at the university of colorado boulder conducted a review of existing imaging data that looked at the effects of alcohol and marijuana or cannabis on the brain . their findings linked alcohol consumption with longterm changes to the structure of white matter and gray matter in the brain . the use of marijuana however seemed to have no significant longterm effects on brain structure . study leader rachel thayer of the department of psychology and neuroscience at the university of colorado boulder and colleagues recently reported their results in the journal addiction . it is estimated that around 22.2 million people in the united states have used marijuana in the past month making it `` the most commonly used illicit drug '' in the country . across the u.s. however it is increasingly becoming legalized for both medicinal and recreational purposes . as a result of this changing legislation researchers have been trying to find out more about how marijuana may benefit health as well as the damage that it could cause . last year for example medical news today reported on a study linking marijuana use to a greater risk of psychosis in teenagers while another study claimed that the drug is `` worse than cigarettes '' for cardiovascular health . on the other side of the coin researchers have found that cannabinoids which are the active compounds in marijuana could help to prevent migraine and a more recent study linked marijuana use to an increased sex drive . marijuana vs. alcohol which is worse for this latest study thayer and colleagues sought to learn more about how marijuana use affects the brain . study coauthor kent hutchison also of the department of psychology and neuroscience notes that to date studies that have investigated this association have produced mixed results . `` when you look at these studies going back years '' he explains `` you see that one study will report that marijuana use is related to a reduction in the volume of the hippocampus . the next study then comes around and they say that marijuana use is related to changes in the cerebellum ... . '' teen marijuana use may lead to bipolar symptoms later on researchers have linked marijuana use in adolescence to a greater risk of bipolar symptoms . read now '' the point is that theres no consistency across all of these studies in terms of the actual brain structures . '' with the aim of closing the gap on this inconsistency the researchers conducted a new analysis on existing brain imaging data . they looked at how marijuana use affects white matter and gray matter in the brain and how its effects compare with another `` drug '' that we have become so accustomed to alcohol . gray matter is the tissue on the brains surface that primarily consists of nerve cell bodies . white matter is the deeper brain tissue that contains myelinated nerve fibers which are branches protruding from nerve cells that transmit electrical impulses to other cells and tissues . the team notes that any reduction in the size of white or gray matter or a loss in their integrity can lead to impairments in brain functioning . `` with alcohol weve known its bad for the brain for decades '' notes hutchison . `` but for cannabis we know so little . '' marijuana use had no impact the study included the brain images of 853 adults who were aged between 18 and 55 years and 439 teenagers between the ages of 14 and 18. all participants varied in their use of alcohol and marijuana . the researchers found that alcohol use particularly in adults who had been drinking for many years was associated with a reduction in gray matter volume as well as a reduction in the integrity of white matter . marijuana use however appeared to have no impact on the structure of gray or white matter in either teenagers or adults . based on these findings the researchers believe that drinking alcohol is likely to be much more harmful to brain health than using marijuana . `` ... while marijuana may also have some negative consequences it definitely is nowhere near the negative consequences of alcohol . '' kent hutchison when it comes to the possible benefits of marijuana use however thayer and her team note that the jury is still out and further research is needed to reach some conclusions .a form of intermittent fasting known as the 168 diet helps obese individuals to lose weight and lower their blood pressure according to a new study . timerestricted eating may be the key to weight loss . more and more people now turn to intermittent fasting as a fast and effective way to lose weight . there are different form of this diet depending on the time intervals of `` fasting '' and `` feasting . '' the socalled 52 diet for instance consists of eating normally for 5 days every week and fasting for 2 days . in the fasting days the dieter restricts their calorie intake to 500 or 600 per day . in daily fasting or the 168 diet people eat whatever they like for 8 hours and fast for the remaining 16. a new study evaluates the benefits of this 168 pattern for obese individuals and finds that not only does the diet work but also that it helps to lower blood pressure . as many as 93.3 million adults have obesity in the united states according to the latest data from the centers for disease control and prevention cdc . thats almost 40 percent of the countrys entire population . this research was led by corresponding author krista varady an associate professor of kinesiology and nutrition at the university of illinois at chicago and the findings were published in the journal nutrition and healthy aging . losing weight without counting calories varady and colleagues recruited 23 obese study participants who were aged 45 years on average with an average body mass index bmi of 35. between 10 a.m. and 6 p.m. the participants could eat whatever and however much they liked but they were only allowed to drink water and caloriefree drinks for the remaining 16 hours . intermittent fasting may have profound health benefits some researchers say that this type of diet can also slow down aging and stave off disease . read now all the study participants were followed for a period of 12 weeks and their dieting outcomes were compared with those of a previous weight loss trial of another type of intermittent fasting called `` alternate day fasting . '' in alternate day fasting they can eat whatever they like for one day and fast for the following day . on average when compared with the control trial those on the 168 diet consumed 350 fewer calories lost 3 percent of their weight and had lower blood pressure . more specifically the systolic blood pressure of those who fasted daily dropped by an average of 7 millimeters of mercury . however insulin resistance cholesterol and fat mass remained the same between the two compared groups . as varady and her colleagues conclude `` these preliminary data offer promise for the use of timerestricted feeding as a weight loss technique in obese adults but longerterm largescale randomized controlled trials are required . '' the studys corresponding author also comments on the significance of the findings saying `` the results we saw in this study are similar to the results weve seen in other studies on alternate day fasting . '' `` but '' she adds `` one of the benefits of the 168 diet may be that it is easier for people to maintain . we observed that fewer participants dropped out of this study when compared to studies on other fasting diets . '' `` the takehome message from this study is that there are options for weight loss that do not include calorie counting or eliminating certain foods . '' krista varady '' the 168 diet is another tool for weight loss that we now have preliminary scientific evidence to support '' varady concludes . `` when it comes to weight loss people need to find what works for them because even small amounts of success can lead to improvements in metabolic health . ''fish oil is hailed for its plentiful health benefits . but new research suggests that the longterm consumption of fish oil or sunflower oil may increase the risk of fatty liver disease later in life . researchers say that lifelong intake of fish oil or sunflower oil could raise the risk of fatty liver disease in later life . by studying rats researchers found that lifelong intake of sunflower oil or fish oil led to changes in the liver that make the organ vulnerable to nonalcoholic steatohepatitis nash . nash is a more serious form of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease nafld . study coauthor josé luis quiles a professor of physiology working at the university of granada in spain and colleagues recently reported their findings in the journal of nutritional biochemistry . it is estimated that around 20 percent of people in the united states who have nafld also have nash and the condition becomes more common with age . nash is characterized by a buildup of fat in the liver which is not caused by alcohol consumption inflammation and liver cell damage . the liver damage that occurs in nash can increase the risk of liver cirrhosis and liver cancer . some of the key risk factors for nash include overweight and obesity high blood pressure high cholesterol and type 2 diabetes which are factors heavily influenced by diet . studying how dietary fats affect the liver building on the link between diet and nash the new study from prof. quiles and his colleagues suggests that the type of oils we consume could play a role in our laterlife risk of the condition . the researchers came to their findings by analyzing the effects of different dietary fats including sunflower oil fish oil and virgin olive oil on rat livers . in detail the team looked at how lifelong intake of each of these oils impacted the structure of the rodents livers as well as their effects on gene expression liver fibrosis or scarring oxidative stress and the length of telomeres . kiwi compound may prevent nonalcoholic fatty liver disease research suggests that nafld could be prevented with a compound found in kiwi . read now oxidative stress is defined as an imbalance between free radicals which are molecules that can damage cells and the bodys ability to `` deoxidize '' these molecules and prevent their harmful effects . telomeres are `` caps '' at the end of each strand of dna and they protect our chromosomes . the shorter our telomeres the greater the damage to our cells . research has shown that a reduction in telomere length plays a key role in cellular aging and agerelated disease . telomeres that are too long however can increase the risk of cancer . additionally the team looked at how the liver evolves with age as a result of the different dietary fats consumed . olive oil best for a healthy liver the researchers not only found that liver fat accumulates with age but they also revealed that the type of fat that builds up on the liver is influenced by the type of fats that we eat . as prof. quiles points out `` ... this means that regardless of this accumulation some livers age in a healthier way than others and with a greater or lesser predisposition to certain diseases . '' the study revealed that fish oil and sunflower oil negatively impacted the liver health of the rats . lifelong sunflower oil intake was found to trigger liver fibrosis and it also altered the structure of the organ led to changes in gene expression and increased oxidation in liver cells . rats that had a lifelong intake of fish oil demonstrated an increase in agerelated cell oxidation in their livers the team reports and they also experienced a decrease in electron transport chain activity in the mitochondria the `` powerhouses '' of the cell which impairs cell function . fish oil also led to an increase in relative telomere length in the liver the researchers report . olive oil however was found to cause the least damage to the liver . taken together the team says these findings indicate that virgin olive oil might be the best dietary fat for laterlife liver health . `` the alterations caused by the longterm consumption of sunflower and fish oils make the liver susceptible to nonalcoholic steatohepatitis a very serious disease that may act as a catalyst for other liver diseases such as cirrhosis and liver cancer . ... we believe that this study will be very useful in preventing and treating diverse liver diseases . '' prof. josé luis quiles '' virgin olive oil is the healthiest option '' he adds `` which has already been proven in relation to diverse aspects of health . '' these findings may come as a surprise fish oil is the most commonly used natural product in the u.s. due to its frequently documented health benefits . still this latest study certainly provides some food for thought when it comes to choosing which fats to include in the diet .popular belief has it and even some governmental authorities on nutrition agree that we should avoid fullfat dairy products due to their high content of saturated fats . but a new study boldly challenges these claims . fullfat dairy products may actually be good for cardiovascular health . wholefat dairy does not raise cardiovascular risk . conversely some fats present in certain dairy products might even keep stroke and heart disease at bay . this is the main takeaway of a recent study led by dr. dariush mozaffarian from the friedman school of nutrition science and policy at tufts university in boston ma . with their findings dr. mozaffarian and team challenge not only popular opinions but also the stance of governmental organizations such as the united states department of agriculture usda and the u.s. department of health human services . the two bodies advise people to avoid fullfat dairy due to its impact on cholesterol levels . the saturated fats found in wholefat dairy products warn the usda raise levels of lowdensity lipoprotein ldl cholesterol also known as the `` bad '' kind of cholesterol . in time high ldl cholesterol may lead to cardiovascular conditions such as atherosclerosis or coronary artery disease . however the new study turns the idea that fullfat dairy is bad for you on its head . the surprising findings were published in the american journal of clinical nutrition . marcia otto who is an assistant professor in the department of epidemiology human genetics and environmental sciences at the university of texas health science center at houston is the first and corresponding author of the paper . dairy fat may prevent heart disease stroke to study the effect of dairy on mortality risk and cardiovascular health dr. mozaffarian and team examined over 2900 u.s. seniors aged 65 and above . the researchers measured the participants blood plasma levels of three fatty acids contained by dairy products at the beginning of the study in 1992 6 years later and then 13 years later . associations with `` total mortality causespecific mortality and cardiovascular disease cvd risk '' were examined . these four foods are proven to lower your cholesterol the `` portfolio diet '' has been proved to keep the heart healthy by several studies . read now during the 22year followup period 2428 of the participants died . of these deaths 833 were due to heart disease . however none of the three fatty acids examined correlated with the risk of total mortality . in fact high circulating levels of heptadecanoic fatty acid were associated with a lower risk of death from heart disease . also adults with higher levels of fatty acids overall were 42 percent less likely to die from stroke revealed the analysis . dietary guidelines should be revised according to the studys corresponding author the findings suggest that current dietary guidelines need to be amended . the 2015–2020 dietary guidelines for americans issued by the office of disease prevention and health promotion recommend the consumption of `` fatfree and lowfat 1 percent dairy including milk yogurt cheese or fortified soy beverages commonly known as soymilk . '' however otto disagrees . `` consistent with previous findings '' she says `` our results highlight the need to revisit current dietary guidance on whole fat dairy foods which are rich sources of nutrients such as calcium and potassium . '' `` these are essential for health not only during childhood but throughout life particularly also in later years when undernourishment and conditions like osteoporosis are more common '' adds the researcher . `` dairy fat contrary to popular belief does not increase the risk of heart disease or overall mortality in older adults . in addition ... the results suggest that one fatty acid present in dairy may lower risk of death from cardiovascular disease particularly from stroke . '' marcia otto she adds `` consumers have been exposed to so much different and conflicting information about diet particularly in relation to fats '' and she highlights the fact that `` a growing body of evidence '' suggests that dairy fat is actually good for you . `` its ... important to have robust studies so people can make more balanced and informed choices based on scientific fact rather than hearsay '' otto concludes .a new study looking at blood stem cells uncovered fresh details surrounding the mechanisms by which alcohol raises the risk of developing cancer . a new study unearths the details of cancers relationship with alcohol . alcohol is known to raise the risk of no fewer than seven types of cancer . these are mouth upper throat pharynx voice box laryngeal esophageal breast liver and bowel cancer . though the links are established exactly how alcohol works to induce malignancy is not as wellunderstood . several mechanisms are thought to be at work . most previous studies have only examined cells in the laboratory looking at changes in them after exposure to alcohol ethanol . recently researchers from mrc laboratory of molecular biology in cambridge united kingdom set out to gain a clearer picture of the alcoholcancer relationship using whole animals . their study which was funded by cancer research u.k. is published this week in the journal nature . acetaldehyde and blood stem cells the team fed diluted ethanol to mice and then used chromosome analysis and dna sequencing to measure any damage caused by acetaldehyde a chemical produced when alcohol is processed . they focused their attention on a specific cell type blood stem cells . blood stem cells found in blood and bone marrow are immature blood cells that can develop into any type of blood cell including white blood cells platelets and red blood cells . it is important to understand how alcohol damages these cells as faulty stem cells are known to cause cancer . as alcohol is broken down in the gut bacteria convert it into large quantities of acetaldehyde a chemical that has previously been shown to cause cancer in animals . even light drinkers at risk of cancer a recent statement from the american society of clinical oncology outlines the dangers of alcohol . read now following the analysis the researchers found that acetaldehyde could in fact damage and break dna within blood stem cells . chromosomes became rearranged and the dna sequence was permanently changed in stem cells . lead study author prof. ketan patel says `` some cancers develop due to dna damage in stem cells . while some damage occurs by chance our findings suggest that drinking alcohol can increase the risk of this damage . '' selfdefense mechanisms alongside new insights into the damage that ethanol causes to stem cells the scientists uncovered new information about the protective mechanisms employed by our bodies in response to alcohol . enzymes called aldehyde dehydrogenases aldhs form the first line of defense against alcoholrelated damage . aldhs break alcohol down into acetate `` which our cells can use as a source of energy . '' millions of people many east asians for instance have low levels of aldh or faulty copies of the enzymes . this means that toxic acetaldehyde builds up in the body . these individuals will experience telltale flushed cheeks and potentially feel ill. when the researchers investigated mice without aldh they found that alcohol caused four times as much damage to dna when compared with mice that could produce aldh . beyond aldh the body has a range of other secondary mechanisms that can repair various types of dna damage . but these mechanisms do not always work some people have mutations that render them ineffective . `` our study highlights that not being able to process alcohol effectively can lead to an even higher risk of alcoholrelated dna damage and therefore certain cancers . '' prof. ketan patel '' but '' he continues `` its important to remember that alcohol clearance and dna repair systems are not perfect and alcohol can still cause cancer in different ways even in people whose defense mechanisms are intact . '' alcohol is known to give rise to cancer and studies such as this help us to understand why and will eventually help to prevent or slow alcoholrelated cancers . as prof. linda bauld from cancer research u.k. says `` this thoughtprovoking research highlights the damage alcohol can do to our cells costing some people more than just a hangover . ''it was previously believed that fructose which is the sugar found in fruit and fruit juice is processed by the liver . however a new study suggests that fructose is mainly processed in the small intestine . researchers reveal that fructose is primarily processed in the small intestine not the liver . the study which is published in the journal cell metabolism reveals that processed highsugar food and drink only spills over into the liver for processing when the small intestine becomes overwhelmed . the recent findings add to the body of scientific knowledge on the effects of too much fructose on the body . we know from previous research that excessive consumption of sugar is harmful to the liver and that chronic overconsumption causes obesity increases resistance to insulin and creates conditions for the onset of diabetes . last year medical news today reported on a study that found that fructosecontaining products such as sweetened drinks can increase the risk of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis a form of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease `` which can lead to cirrhosis or liver cancer . '' study observed fructose digestion in mice the researchers from princeton university in new jersey used mice to study how fructose travels through the digestive system . their findings suggest that there is a physiological difference in how the body processes different amounts of sugar . rather than the liver processing all the sugar in the body the team observed that more than 90 percent of fructose was processed in the small intestines of the mice in the study . the team found that fructose not absorbed into the small intestine is passed through to the colon where it comes into contact with the microbiome which is the microbiotic flora that inhabits the large intestine and colon . fruit juices and smoothies have unacceptably high sugar content researchers reveal that a childs entire daily sugar allowance could be in one serving of fruit juice . read now the researchers explain that the microbiome is not designed to process sugar . so while a person could eat a large amount of carbohydrates without exposing their microbiome to any sugar this changes significantly when highsugar products such as soda and juice are consumed . while the findings do not prove that fructose influences the microbiome the team believes that `` an effect is likely . '' they suggest that this link should be further investigated in future studies as it may provide new insights into the adverse effects of high sugar intake . eat sugar only after meals in the study the small intestine was found to clear fructose more efficiently after a meal . the team theorizes that during periods of fasting such as in the morning or midafternoon individuals may be more vulnerable to fructose as the small intestine has reduced ability to process it during these times . as study author joshua d. rabinowitz of the lewissigler institute for integrative genomics at princeton university explains `` we can offer some reassurance at least from these animal studies that fructose from moderate amounts of fruits will not reach the liver . '' `` we saw that feeding of the mice prior to the sugar exposure enhanced the small intestines ability to process fructose '' rabinowitz continues . `` and that protected the liver and the microbiome from sugar exposure . '' rabinowitz says that the results support `` the most oldfashioned advice in the world '' which is to `` limit sweets to moderate quantities after meals '' and avoid sugary drinks outside of meal times .it is known that being overweight or obese leads to poor health but it may be less known that abdominal fat is the most harmful type . until now researchers were unsure of the mechanisms responsible for this but now they reveal how an enzyme produced by our liver raises the risk of diabetes . inflammation in the fat around the belly is particularly harmful and new research reveals why . when it comes to the harmful consequences of excess fat the way it is distributed across the body is key . medical news today have recently reported on studies showing that abdominal fat is deeply tied to type 2 diabetes and heart disease . we have also covered studies suggesting that women in particular could be at an increased cardiometabolic risk if they have a higher waisttohip ratio . additional research has found that belly fat is particularly dangerous when inflamed . older studies have shown that local inflammation in the adipose tissue leads to cardiometabolic abnormalities such as insulin resistance . but the exact mechanism responsible for this connection between adipose tissue inflammation and cardiometabolic disorders has remained somewhat unclear for instance researchers have wondered whether the inflammation is `` a cause or a consequence of insulin resistance . '' now researchers at columbia university irving medical center in new york city ny help to shed some muchneeded light on the issue they reveal that the liver contributes to this inflammation . the team was led by dr. ira tabas who is the richard j. stock professor of medicine at columbia university vagelos college of physicians and surgeons and the findings were published in the journal nature . the key role of dpp4 inhibitors in diabetes dr. tabas and his colleagues used obese mice to test whether blocking an enzyme called dpp4 would lower the inflammation in their abdominal fat . the researchers focused on dpp4 because humans who already have diabetes are prescribed dpp4 inhibitors to help them manage their symptoms . dpp4 inhibitors work by preventing the enzyme from interacting with an insulinboosting hormone . lowcalorie sweeteners may promote metabolic syndrome people with metabolic syndrome are much more likely to develop diabetes . to prevent it new research suggests that these people should avoid artificial sweeteners . read now in this study dpp4 did not lower abdominal inflammation in mice . dr. tabas explains these findings suggesting that they may be down to the difference between how dpp4 inhibitors work in the gut versus how they work in the liver . `` dpp4 inhibitors lower blood sugar by inhibiting dpp4 in the gut . but we have some evidence that dpp4 inhibitors in the gut also end up promoting inflammation in fat '' he states . `` that cancels out the antiinflammatory effects the drugs may have when they reach inflammatory cells called macrophages in the fat . '' `` from our studies '' adds dr. tabas `` we know that dpp4 interacts with a molecule on these cells to increase inflammation . if we could block that interaction we might be able stop the enzyme from causing inflammation and insulin resistance . '' so the researchers targeted dpp4 in the liver cells instead of the gut . this reduced adipose inflammation and lowered insulin resistance . dpp4 inhibitors also decreased blood sugar . toward human clinical trials as dr. tabas reports `` inhibiting dpp4 specifically in liver cells attacks insulin resistance the core problem of type 2 diabetes at least in our preclinical models . '' the researchers explain what the findings mean for future treatments of type 2 diabetes . dr. tabas says `` if we can develop ways to target liver dpp4 in people this may be a powerful new way to treat obesityinduced type 2 diabetes . '' dr. ahmed a. hasan a medical officer and program director in the atherothrombosis coronary artery disease branch of the national heart lung and blood institute also comments on the findings . he says `` this study reveals a potential new target for the treatment of type 2 diabetes and cardiometabolic disorders . '' `` these findings may pave the way for a future clinical trial to test whether a new treatment approach based on this target could improve insulin resistance in diabetic patients . more research is needed . '' dr. ahmed a. hasanby finding a link to a condition that raises the risk of type 2 diabetes new research questions the health benefits of ketogenic diets . is there a link between diabetes and the keto diet ketogenic diets are lowcarbohydrate highfat diets that have been shown to reduce weight . they change metabolism so that energy comes from fat instead of sugar . when researchers in switzlerland examined what happened to mice in the early stages of a ketogenic diet they found that the animals showed a poorer ability to regulate blood sugar compared with similar mice on a highfat highcarbohydrate diet . in a paper on their work now published in the journal of physiology they note that `` even though keto dietfed animals appear healthy in the fasted state they exhibit decreased glucose tolerance to a greater extent than highfat dietfed animals . '' the reason for this they found was that the livers of the keto dietfed mice were not responding as well to insulin . this condition which is known as insulin resistance raises the risk of developing type 2 diabetes . `` diabetes is one of the biggest health issues we face '' says study author christian wolfrum who is with the institute of food nutrition and health at eth zürich in switzerland . insulin resistance insulin is a hormone that helps the body control levels of blood sugar or glucose . if blood sugar stays above normal for long periods of time it becomes a condition called hyperglycemia that can lead to serious health problems . this is the hallmark of diabetes . in type 1 diabetes hyperglycemia develops because the pancreas does not make enough insulin . in type 2 diabetes organs and tissues lose their ability to respond to insulin . the pancreas tries to compensate by making more insulin but eventually this is not enough and leads to hyperglycemia . normal blood sugar levels may not be so normal after all researchers have found that `` normal '' levels of blood glucose often mask spikes that are considerably higher than what is considered healthy . read now there are a number of ways in which insulin helps control blood glucose levels . one is by signaling to the liver to reduce glucose production and another is by helping muscles and tissues absorb glucose and convert it into energy . insulin resistance is a `` complex metabolic disorder '' with no obvious single cause . the liver becomes insulin resistant when it fails to reduce glucose production in response to insulin . cells can also become insulin resistant when they need increasing amounts of the hormone to help them use glucose . however the researchers found that the main reason for decreased glucose tolerance in the keto dietfed mice was due to insulin resistance in the liver `` rather than impaired glucose clearance and tissue glucose uptake . '' despite extensive research into the causes of insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes they are not completely understood . one thing that scientists do know is that fatlike substances called lipids are `` clearly associated with insulin resistance . '' even here however many questions remain such as `` is the link due to circulating fats or to fat buildup in tissue '' ketogenic diets and ketosis by dramatically reducing intake of carbohydrates keto diets induce a metabolic state known as ketosis . in this state cells that would normally get their energy from glucose switch to ketones . the lack of carbohydrates makes the body break down fats into fatty acids and then into ketones . keto diets are probably among the `` most studied '' approaches to weight loss of recent times . a lot of research now backs the idea that keto diets have a sound `` physiological and biochemical basis '' and can significantly benefit cardiovascular health . this is welcome news to many physicians for whom one of the biggest challenges that they face in their daily practices is treating obesity . however while keto diets have a proven track record in tackling obesity some concerns remain . many of these likely relate to a `` broad lack of knowledge about the physiological mechanisms involved . '' mechanisms of insulin resistance not clear the new study helps plug some of this knowledge gap . it suggests that insulin resistance in the liver can develop in the early stages of keto diets . this now needs to be confirmed in humans . also the underlying mechanisms that lead to insulin resistance are still unclear especially in relation to different diets . this also needs to be explored further say the researchers . another area that needs further research is the effect on the brain of the byproducts of fatty acid breakdown . the researchers theory is that the fatty acid byproducts might have important `` signaling roles '' in the brain . `` although ketogenic diets are known to be healthy our findings indicate that there may be an increased risk of insulin resistance with this type of diet that may lead to type 2 diabetes . '' christian wolfrumby probing the effect that vitamin d3 has on the cells that make up the lining of blood vessels scientists at ohio university in athens oh have identified for the first time the role that the `` sunshine vitamin '' plays in preserving cardiovascular health . the sunshine vitamin has been shown to preserve heart health . in a paper published in the international journal of nanomedicine they describe how they used nanosensors and a cell model to identify the molecular mechanisms that vitamin d3 can trigger in the endothelium which is the thin layer of tissue that lines blood vessels . it was previously believed that the endothelium served no other purpose than to act as an inert `` wrapper '' of the vascular system allowing both water and electrolytes to pass in and out of the bloodstream . however advances over the past 30 years have revealed that the endothelium acts more like an organ that lines the whole of the circulatory system from the `` heart to the smallest capillaries '' and whose cells carry out many unique biological functions . changes to the endothelium have been linked to several serious health problems including high blood pressure insulin resistance diabetes tumor growth virus infections and atherosclerosis which is a condition wherein fatty deposits can build up inside arteries and increase the risk of heart attack and stroke . vitamin d3 has role beyond bone health the new study suggests that vitamin d3 a version of vitamin d that our bodies produce naturally when we expose our skin to the sun plays a key role in preserving and restoring the damage to the endothelium that occurs in these diseases . some other natural sources of vitamin d3 include egg yolks and oily fish . it is also obtainable in the form of supplements . vitamin d3 is already wellknown for its role in bone health . `` however '' explains senior author tadeusz malinski a professor in the department of chemistry and biochemistry `` in recent years in clinical settings people recognize that many patients who have a heart attack will have a deficiency of d3 . '' `` it doesnt mean that the deficiency caused the heart attack '' he adds `` but it increased the risk of heart attack . '' nanosensors probed effect of d3 on cells for their study prof. malinski and colleagues developed a measuring system using nanosensors or tiny probes that are 1000 times smaller than the thickness of human hair and can operate at the level of atoms and molecules . they used the nanosensors to track the impact of vitamin d3 on molecular mechanisms in human endothelial cells that had been treated to show the same type of damage that occurs from high blood pressure . blood vessel discovery may prevent diabetes a new microscopy technique reveals that the transport of insulin across the endothelium differs to that suggested previously . read now the findings suggest that vitamin d3 is a powerful trigger of nitric oxide which is a molecule that plays an important signaling role in the control of blood flow and the formation of blood clots in blood vessels . the researchers also found that vitamin d3 significantly reduces oxidative stress in the vascular system . they note that their study `` provides direct molecular insight to previously published observations that have suggested that vitamin d3 deficiencyinduced hypertension is associated with vascular oxidative stress . '' the effects of vitamin d3 were similar in both caucasian and african american endothelial cells . could d3 reverse cardiovascular damage the study authors note that while their findings came from tests performed on a cellular model of high blood pressure `` the implications of the influence of vitamin d3 on dysfunctional endothelium is much broader . '' they suggest that vitamin d3 has the potential to significantly reverse the damage that high blood pressure diabetes atherosclerosis and other diseases inflict on the cardiovascular system . `` there are not many '' prof. malinski adds `` if any known systems which can be used to restore cardiovascular endothelial cells which are already damaged and vitamin d3 can do it . '' `` this is a very inexpensive solution to repair the cardiovascular system . we dont have to develop a new drug . we already have it . '' prof. tadeusz malinskisome people find it harder to lose weight than others but why is this a new study has identified a molecule in fat cells that could be to blame . researchers have uncovered one reason why some people may find it hard to lose weight . researchers found that the fat cells of people who are obese show higher expression of a molecule called lysyl oxidase lox . lox is associated with fibrosis or `` scarring '' of fat tissue which as previous research has shown can hamper weight loss efforts . study coauthor dr. katarina kos who works in the diabetes and obesity research group at the university of exeter medical school in the united kingdom and colleagues recently reported their findings in the journal metabolism . it is thought that around 1 in 3 adults in the united states are obese which puts them at increased risk of type 2 diabetes stroke heart disease and some forms of cancer . a lack of exercise and a poor diet are the primary causes of obesity so its no surprise that eating a healthful diet and increasing physical activity are the first strategies we try in an attempt to shed the pounds . but these interventions can produce mixed results some individuals see the pounds fall off while others find it much more challenging . the new study may have uncovered one explanation for the latter . higher lox levels in people who are obese for their study dr. kos and colleagues analyzed samples of abdominal fat tissue that had been taken from obese individuals before they underwent weight loss surgery . compared with abdominal fat tissue samples of leaner subjects the analysis revealed that the fat tissue of obese people had greater expression of the lox molecule which is a cause of fat tissue fibrosis . on further investigation the researchers found that the increase in lox expression was driven by an increase in oxygen deprivation and inflammation in fat cells which occurs when fat cells become larger . weight loss breakthrough sunlight is key researchers suggest that lack of sunlight may be to blame for winter weight gain . read now the scientists explain that when fat cells undergo this type of stress they lose their ability to store excess calories . as a result these calories become stored as fat around important organs such as the liver and heart and this is associated with numerous health problems including heart disease and type 2 diabetes . unfortunately studies have shown that fat tissue fibrosis can make it harder for individuals to lose weight . `` but this does not mean that scarring makes weight loss impossible '' dr. kos emphasizes . `` adding some regular activity to a somewhat reduced energy intake for a longer period makes weight loss possible and helps the fat tissue not to become further overworked '' she continues . `` we know that doing this improves our blood sugar and is key in the management of diabetes . '' we need to look after our fat what is more the teams findings indicate that targeting the lox molecule could be one way to prevent fat cell fibrosis and possibly make weight loss easier but more studies are needed to confirm this theory . dr. kos notes that further research is also needed in order to identify other ways to prevent fat tissue fibrosis . in the meantime she says that increasing our physical activity could help . `` there is evidence that once fat tissue becomes scarred despite weight loss it may not recover fully '' she says . `` we need to look after our fat tissue which can cease to cope if it is overworked when being forced to absorb more and more calories . '' `` as a clinician '' dr. kos concludes `` i would advise exercise or at least a walk after a meal which can make a great difference to our metabolic health . ''its likely that we all enjoy a hot cup of tea or herbal infusion at least from time to time if not on a daily basis . but what are the most important health benefits that some of these soothing teas can bring us read on to learn more about the top teas for our health . some teas and herbal infusions have long been appreciated for their alleged health benefits but what does research have to say '' tea began as a medicine and grew into a beverage '' writes 19thcentury japanese scholar okakura kakuzo in his infamous publication the book of tea . in it he speaks at length about the history of tea and the philosophy of the traditional japanese tea ceremony . kakuzo was correct modern research about the history of teadrinking in the world confirms that this beverage was originally consumed less for pleasure or as a mindfulness aid calling for the drinker to take slow sips and be in the moment . instead as shown by prof. victor henry mair from the university of pennsylvania in philadelphia in the true history of tea early in its history the tea plant camellia sinensis became popular for its medicinal properties . the tea plants main varieties camellia sinensis sinensis and camellia sinensis assamica are responsible for most of the tea brews that we are accustomed to black tea green tea white tea and oolong tea . there are many other types of teas and infusions using various other plants such as aspalathus linearis which is better known as `` rooibos '' or `` redbush . '' in this spotlight well give you an overview of the top five teas that can benefit your health . 1. green tea a favorite with tea drinkers everywhere green tea has been praised for its medicinal properties for years . some recent studies have now confirmed some of these benefits suggesting that green tea may protect various aspects of our health . green tea can increase cognitive functioning . to begin with this beverage has been found to enhance cognitive functioning with one study connecting it to better working memory the type of we use on a daytoday basis . researchers from the university hospital of basel in switzerland found that healthy people who agreed to consume a soft drink containing 27.5 grams of green tea extract exhibited more intense activity in brain areas linked to working memory . therefore participants who had ingested the green tea extract had better connectivity between the frontal and parietal lobes of the brain which are two regions involved in aspects of learning memory processes and decisionmaking . the health benefits brought about by green tea have been linked with their content of polyphenols which are micronutrients with antioxidant properties . as antioxidants these substances can protect against the action of free radicals which induce the type of cellular damage consistent with aging . a 2017 study that was published in the journal of the american chemical society found that one such polyphenol found in green tea called epigallocatechin gallate may lower the risk of alzheimers disease by interacting with the `` building blocks '' that form betaamyloid plaques . a buildup of these plaques in the brain is typical of this condition and impairs brain cell signaling . epigallocatechin gallate this study suggests could stop betaamyloid from forming into plaques potentially helping to keep alzheimers at bay . this same green tea polyphenol has also been said to slow down the growth of tumor cells of certain types of cancer such as pancreatic cancer . research that was led by the los angeles biomedical research institute in california has shown that epigallocatechin gallate can disrupt the metabolism of pancreatic cancer cells thereby impairing their growth . 2. jasmine tea what we refer to as `` jasmine tea '' is a type of beverage that usually has green tea at its base to which jasmine flowers are added for an enriched aroma . jasmine tea is an important component of the diet of one of the longestliving populations in the world . but the benefits of jasmine tea arent solely due to the antioxidant effects of the tea plant since jasmine blooms also bring their own medicinal properties to the mix . in the book ikigai the japanese secret to a long and happy life authors héctor garcía and francesc miralles note that the inhabitants of a healthy longlived community in the okinawa prefecture of japan are avid drinkers of sanpincha a special blend of green tea and jasmine . `` okinawans drink more sanpincha a mix of green tea and jasmine flowers than any other kind of tea '' they write suggesting that this blend may play a role in keeping the inhabitants of okinawa healthy and mentally agile well into old age . this may be because like the tea plant jasmine flowers contain antioxidants which may protect cells from agerelated damage . what are the best foods to fight aging read about the top five foods that will help you to stay young in body and mind . read now jasmine itself has been linked with improved physical wellbeing and is said to reduce the impact of stress . that is why some researchers have experimented with compounds derived from this plant in the search of better therapies . for instance prof. eliezer flescher from tel aviv university in israel noticed that methyl jasmonate which is a compound obtained from jasmonic acid found in the jasmine plant induces the death of cervical cancer cells . and if you happen to enjoy drinking jasmine tea simply because you love the way it smells theres actually a good reason for that . research that was published in the european journal of applied physiology explained that the smell of jasmine tea is soothing able to calm nerves and able to help regulate mood . 3. rooibos tea another type of tea with antioxidant properties is rooibos or `` redbush tea '' which is prepared from the aspalathus linearis plant native to south africa . rooibos tea may protect liver health . research has suggested that the antioxidant effects of rooibos are similar to if not quite as strong as those of green tea . a recent study on the rat model has suggested that the antioxidants in rooibos tea may protect the liver from oxidative stress helping to render this organ more resilient to induced damage . the researchers who conducted the study noted that their findings suggest that rooibos tea or rooibosderived dietary supplements may offer a useful health boost . `` results from this study suggest that the daily intake of unfermented rooibos herbal tea or a derived commercial rooibos supplement may benefit human health by providing the liver with an enhanced antioxidant capacity to reduce damage induced by toxicants . '' moreover rooibos has also been cited as helpful in lowering blood pressure and relaxing tense muscles suggesting that the active ingredient in this instance might be one of the flavonoids pigments that it contains chrysoeriol . unlike green or black tea rooibos does not contain any caffeine so it wont have the same stimulating effects . this makes it safe to drink well into the evening . 4. hibiscus tea those of you who enjoy the refreshing taste of a more sour brew may also be familiar with herbal infusions of hibiscus a plant whose flowers can be used not just to make invigorating beverages but also to give a subtle `` punch '' to salads or as an elegant garnish for sophisticated dishes . hibiscus tea is an antioxidant and may bring cardiovascular benefits . the most commonly used variety is hibiscus sabdariffa also known as the `` roselle . '' for the tea or more correctly `` tisane '' herbal tea its calyces are typically used although other parts of the plant such as the leaves seeds and roots are safe for consumption . studies have suggested that extracts from the hibiscus calyx and hibiscus leaves have antioxidant and antitumoral effects . therefore they may protect against the aging action of free radicals at a cellular level as well as fight certain types of leukemia cells . hibiscus tea has also been tied to cardiovascular benefits helping to regulate systolic and diastolic blood pressure that is blood pressure during and inbetween heart beats respectively . though not so commonly used to brew tea hibiscus leaves have also been linked repeatedly to a wide array of health benefits . thus the polyphenols in hibiscus leaves may help to induce tumor cell death in skin cancer according to a 2015 study . another study from the same year also argued that hibiscus leaf extracts could inhibit the action of prostate cancer cells . 5. lemon verbena tea another herbal tea whose medicinal properties are getting increasingly recognized is that made out of lemon verbena scientifically dubbed aloysia citrodora . infusions with lemon verbena are said to help with weight management . it is the citrusflavored cousin of a betterknown plant that has been used in herbal infusions for years verbena or vervain verbena officinalis . infusions made with lemon verbena are great for those who like me prefer a subtler citrusy aroma in their hot drinks rather than the strong lemony flavor of commonly commercialized citrus tea blends . the first time that i came upon this plant sold as a tisane herb was in a local organic shop that was selling it as `` weight loss tea . '' in fact studies have shown that the polyphenols in this plant can decrease the formation of fatty acids marking its potential use in the treatment of obesityrelated health issues . researchers have also suggested that lemon verbena extracts may help to lower inflammatory markers levels in the blood of some people with multiple sclerosis . `` results demonstrate that supplementation with lemon verbena extracts may affect the cytokine inflammation markers profile depending on the clinical subtype '' the study authors conclude . having a cup of your tea or tisane of choice may be a pleasant way to carve out some selfindulgence time and stimulate your bodily and mental wellbeing in a subtle way . but always keep in mind that as the saying goes `` one swallow does not a summer make '' and the most potent health benefits are best reaped by leading a healthful wholesome lifestyle . we picked linked items based on the quality of products and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you . we partner with some of the companies that sell these products which means healthline uk and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a links above .heart disease is still the number one killer in the united states . in this spotlight we outline 16 foods that when consumed as part of a wellrounded diet might help to keep your heart healthy . how can you improve your heart health with food there are many things you can do to help keep your heart healthy and diseasefree . you can schedule an annual checkup exercise daily quit smoking or take steps to reduce the level of stress in your life . all of these things can have a positive effect on heart health . but one of the simplest lifestyle changes that will benefit your heart is watching what you eat . nearly 6 million people are currently living with heart failure and around half of these will die within 5 years of being diagnosed . the centers for disease control and prevention cdc warn that eating foods high in fat cholesterol or sodium can be very bad for the heart . so when taking steps to minimize the risk of heart disease diet is a good place to start . in this article we examine some of the best foods for ensuring that you keep a robust and healthy heart . 1. asparagus asparagus is a natural source of folate which helps to prevent an amino acid called homocysteine from building up in the body . high homocysteine levels have been linked with an increased risk of heartrelated conditions such as coronary artery disease and stroke . 2. beans peas chickpeas and lentils beans peas chickpeas and lentils otherwise known as pulses or legumes can all significantly reduce levels of lowdensity lipoprotein ldl or `` bad cholesterol . '' they are also packed with fiber protein and antioxidant polyphenols all of which have beneficial effects on the heart and general health . 3. berries berries are also full of antioxidant polyphenols which help to reduce heart disease risk . berries are a great source of fiber folate iron calcium vitamin a and vitamin c and they are low in fat . 4. broccoli some studies suggest that regularly eating steamed broccoli can lower cholesterol levels and prevent heart disease . 5. chia seeds and flaxseeds these seeds are a rich plantbased source of omega3 fatty acids such as alphalinolenic acid . omega3s have many beneficial effects such as helping to lower levels of triglycerides ldl and total cholesterol . they also reduce blood pressure and minimize the buildup of fatty plaques in the arteries . omega3s decrease the risk of disorders that can lead to heart attack such as thrombosis and arrhythmias . 6. dark chocolate dark chocolate is a rare example of a food that tastes amazing and is good for you in moderation . dark chocolate delicious and hearthealthy . scientists now believe that dark chocolate has protective benefits against atherosclerosis which is when plaque builds up inside the arteries increasing risk of heart attack and stroke . dark chocolate seems to prevent two of the mechanisms implicated in atherosclerosis stiffness of the arteries and white blood cell adhesion which is when white blood cells stick to the walls of blood vessels . what is more studies have found that increasing dark chocolates flavanol content which is the compound that makes it tasty and moreish does not diminish these protective benefits . 7. coffee also in the `` almost too good to be true '' camp is coffee . one recent study found that regularly drinking coffee was linked with a decreased risk of developing heart failure and stroke . however it is important to bear in mind that this study which used machine learning to assess data from the framingham heart study can only observe an association between factors and can not conclusively identify cause and effect . could coffee stop clogged arteries consuming more than three cups of coffee every day may lower the risk of atherosclerosis . read now 8. fish high in omega3s fish is a strong source of hearthelping omega3 fatty acids and protein but it is low in saturated fat . people who have heart disease or are at risk of developing it are often recommended to increase their intake of omega3s by eating fish this is because they lower the risk of abnormal heartbeats and slow the growth of plaque in the arteries . according to the american heart association aha we should eat a 3.5ounce serving of fatty fish such as salmon mackerel herring lake trout sardines or albacore tuna at least twice per week . 9. green tea a 2011 systematic review found that drinking green tea is associated with a small reduction in cholesterol which as we know is a main contributor to heart disease and stroke . but the review could not pinpoint how much green tea someone would have to drink to receive any health benefits . in 2014 another review studied the effects of drinking green tea on people with high blood pressure . the report concluded that green tea was associated with a reduction in blood pressure . but the authors were unable to determine if this modest reduction could help to prevent heart disease . 10. nuts almonds hazelnuts peanuts pecans pistachios and walnuts are all hearthealthy nut options . these nuts are full of protein fiber minerals vitamins and antioxidants . like fish and flaxseeds walnuts are also ripe with omega3 fatty acids making them a hearthealthy snack to have on the go . 11. liver of all the organ meats liver is the most nutrientdense . in particular liver is bulging with folic acid iron chromium copper and zinc which increase the bloods hemoglobin level and help to keep our heart healthy . 12. oatmeal because oatmeal is rich in soluble fiber it may help to reduce the risk of heart disease . a 2008 review of the evidence concluded that oatbased products significantly reduce ldl and total cholesterol without any adverse effects . 13. red wine sort of many studies have noted the potential health benefits of the antioxidants in red wine . however it is unlikely that the benefits of the antioxidants outweigh the dangers of alcohol . red wine contains beneficial antioxidants but bear in mind that it should only be consumed in moderation . recently however a new study proposed that these same antioxidants could form the basis of a new stent for use during angioplasty the process where narrow or obstructed veins are widened to treat atherosclerosis . the researchers behind that study are currently developing a new kind of stent that releases red winelike antioxidants into the blood to promote healing prevent blood clotting and reduce inflammation during angioplasty . it is worth noting that drinking alcohol in general is not healthy for your heart . in fact it is vitally important for cardiovascular health to drink alcohol in moderation if at all . 14. spinach you can help to maintain a healthy heart rhythm by regularly consuming good sources of magnesium . spinach is one of the best sources of dietary magnesium and consumption of popeyes favorite food is associated with a raft of health benefits . 15. tomatoes tomatoes have lots of nutrients that might help keep our hearts healthy . the little red fruits are chockfull of fiber potassium vitamin c folate and choline which are all good for the heart . as well as helping to keep heart disease at bay potassium benefits muscles and bones and helps prevent kidney stones from forming . scientists have argued that increasing potassium intake while decreasing sodium intake is the most important dietary change when attempting to reduce the risk of heart disease . 16. vegetables the aha advise that we eat eight or more servings of fruit and vegetables each day . vegetables are low in fat and calories but rich in fiber minerals and vitamins . a healthful amount of veggies in the diet can help to moderate weight and blood pressure .there are a million things that we do every day without thinking brushing our teeth drying our hair after a shower and unlocking our phone screen so we can check our messages are all part of our routine but what takes place in the brain as we learn a new habit what happens in the brain when habits take shape whats something youve learned to do without thinking it might be locking the door behind you as you leave which could lead to some panic later as you wonder if you actually remembered to do it it might be driving to work have you ever had that uncanny experience of finding yourself at your destination without fully remembering how you got there i certainly have and its all thanks to the brains trusty autopilot mode habits drive our lives so much so that sometimes we might want to break the habit as the saying goes and experience something new but habits are a useful tool when we do something enough times we become effortlessly good at it which is perhaps why aristotle reportedly believed that `` excellence is not an act but a habit '' so what does habit formation look like in the brain how do our neural networks behave as we learn something and consolidate it into an effortless behavior through repetition these are the questions that ann graybiel and her colleagues from the massachusetts institute of technology in chestnut hill set out to answer in a recent study the findings of which are published in the journal current biology bookending neural signals although a habitual action seems so simple and effortless it actually typically involves a string of small necessary movements such as unlocking the car getting into it adjusting the mirrors securing the seatbelt and so on this complex set of movements that amount to one routine action that we perform unconsciously is called `` chunking '' and although we know that it exists exactly how `` chunks '' form and stabilize has remained mysterious so far could this protein hold the key to memory to store or not to store learn about the protein that may hold the key to memory retention read now the new study now suggests that some brain cells are tasked with `` bookending '' the chunks that correspond to habitual actions in another study graybiel and her former team found that the striatum a region of the brain previously associated with decisionmaking also plays an important role in acquiring habits working with mice the team noted that the patterns of signals transmitted between neurons in the striatum shifted as the animals were taught a new sequence of actions turning in one direction at a sound signal while navigating a maze which then evolved into a habit at the beginning of the learning process the neurons in the mices striata emitted a continuous string of signals the scientists saw but as the mices actions started to consolidate into habitual movements the neurons fired their distinctive signals only at the beginning and at the end of the task performed when a signaling pattern takes root explain graybiel and colleagues a habit has taken shape and breaking it becomes a difficult endeavor brain patterns that indicate habits although edifying graybiels previous efforts did not establish for certain that the signaling patterns observed in the brain were related to habit formation they could simply have been motor commands that regulated the mices running behavior in order to confirm the idea that the patterns corresponded to the chunking associated with habit formation graybiel and her current team devised a different set of experiments in the new study they set out to teach rats to press two levers repeatedly in a specific order the researchers used reward conditioning to motivate the animals if they pressed the levers in the correct sequence they were offered chocolate milk to ensure that there would be no doubt regarding the solidity of the experiments results and that they would be able to identify brain activity patterns related to habit formation rather than anything else the scientists taught the rats different sequences sure enough once the animals had learned to press the levers in the sequence established by their trainers the team noticed the same `` bookending '' pattern in the striatum sets of neurons would fire signals at the beginning and end of a task thus delimitating a `` chunk '' `` i think '' explains graybiel `` this more or less proves that the development of bracketing patterns serves to package up a behavior that the brain and the animals consider valuable and worth keeping in their repertoire '' '' it really is a highlevel signal that helps to release that habit and we think the end signal says the routine has been done '' ann graybiel finally the team also noted the formation of another complementary pattern of activity in a group of inhibitory brain cells called `` interneurons '' in the striatum '' the interneurons '' explains lead study author nuné martiros of harvard university in cambridge ma `` were activated during the time when the rats were in the middle of performing the learned sequence '' she adds that the interneurons `` could possibly be preventing the principal neurons from initiating another routine until the current one was finished '' '' the discovery of this opposite activity by the interneurons '' martiros concludes `` also gets us one step closer to understanding how brain circuits can actually produce this pattern of activity ''eat well for a long and healthy life – thats a mantra that were all familiar with but what are the best foods to help us achieve that goal in this article we give you an overview of some of the most healthful and nutritious foods what are the best foods for a healthful diet we investigate official figures indicate that currently the top three countries in the world with the highest life expectancy are the principality of monaco japan and singapore these are places where the inhabitants experience a high quality of life and an important element of that is eating healthful meals often we find praise for `` superfoods '' in the media – foods so high in nutritional value that they are seen as dietary superheroes nutritionists reject the term `` superfoods '' as a buzzword that can influence people to place too high an expectation on a limited range of foods when in reality a balanced diet and healthful lifestyle require more effort than eating your fiveaday still there are certain foods that are more nutritious than others and many that as research has shown have a protective effect against a range of diseases here we give you an overview of some of the best foods that you may want to consider including in your diet in your quest for a happy healthy life edamame soybeans edamame or fresh soybeans have been a staple of asian cuisine for generations but they have also been gaining popularity on the western front of late soybeans are often sold in snack packs but they are also added to a varied range of dishes from soups to ricebased meals though they are served as cooked and seasoned on their own too edamame and tofu are rich in isoflavones which may have anticancer properties the beans are rich in isoflavones a type of phytoestrogen – that is plantderived estrogenlike substances isoflavones are known to have antiinflammatory antioxidant anticancer and antimicrobial properties thus they can help to regulate the inflammatory response of the body slow down cellular aging fight microbes as well as reportedly protect against certain types of cancer edamame are rich in two types of isoflavones in particular genistein and daidzein a study covered last year on medical news today found that genistein could be used to improve breast cancer treatment in the meantime the study authors note that `` lifetime intake of soy has been linked to reduced risk of breast cancer '' so we may want to include soybeans in our normal diet tofu soybean curd similarly tofu a white cheeselike product made of soybean curds has been linked to a wealth of health benefits for the same reasons tofu is often found cooked in typical eastern asian dishes it can be fried baked or boiled for instance in soups as a soy product it is rich in isoflavones whose health benefits weve outlined above it is also a good source of protein and it contains all the essential amino acids that our bodies need to synthesize protein moreover it is also rich in minerals which our bodies need to keep our teeth and bones strong and healthy and to derive energy tofu is a source of calcium iron manganese selenium phosphorous magnesium zinc and copper some specialists also suggest that eating tofu can make you feel fuller for longer so incorporating it into your meals may help to prevent overeating carrots this common culinary ingredient best known in its orange variety is famously recommended for its high content of betacarotene a pigment and carotenoid that gives the widespread version of this root vegetable its color carrots can protect against agerelated eyesight damage betacarotene can be converted by our bodies into vitamin a which according to the national institutes of health nih `` is involved in immune function vision reproduction and cellular communication '' our bodies can not produce vitamin a on their own so it must be derived from our diet this pigment is also an antioxidant that can protect the cells in our bodies from the aging damage caused by free radicals moreover research has shown that foods rich in carotenoids and of course carrots are a prime example here can protect against agerelated macular degeneration the vision damage caused by old age some varieties of carrots such as white carrots do not contain the orange pigment betacarotene but they do all contain falcarinol a nutrient which some studies claim may have a protective effect against cancer while raw carrots may be best for health as they retain their nutrients there are also ways of cooking carrots that can keep most of their nutrients `` locked in '' in an interview one researcher who investigated the anticancer effect of falcarinol from carrots kirsten brandt from newcastle university in the united kingdom suggests that we may want to boil our carrots whole if we want them cooked but still bursting with nutrients '' chopping up your carrots increases the surface area so more of the nutrients leach out into the water while they are cooked by keeping them whole and chopping them up afterwards you are locking in nutrients and the taste so the carrot is better for you all round '' cruciferous vegetables another important type of food on our list are cruciferous vegetables also known as `` brassica vegetables '' which include a wide array of green foods such as cabbage broccoli brussels sprouts cauliflower bok choy radish and kale cruciferous vegetables can bring a wealth of health benefits these vegetables boast an especially rich nutrient content including many vitamins c e k and folate minerals potassium calcium and selenium and carotenoids lutein betacarotene and zeaxanthin cruciferous vegetables also contain glucosinolates the substances that give these greens their characteristic pungent flavor these substances have been found to bring diverse health benefits some glucosinolates seem to regulate the bodys stress and inflammation response they have antimicrobial properties and some of them are being investigated for their anticancer potential one recent study covered on mnt found that leafy greens including some cruciferous vegetables such as kale and collard greens helped to slow down cognitive decline consequently the study researchers suggest that `` adding a daily serving of green leafy vegetables to your diet may be a simple way to foster your brain health '' kale broccoli and cabbage have also been shown to have a protective effect on heart health thanks to their vitamin k content finally cruciferous vegetables are also a great source of soluble fiber which plays a role in regulating blood sugar levels and diminishing the absorption of fat thus helping to prevent excess weight gain salmon recent studies have suggested that consumption of meat mostly red meat but also some kinds of poultry meat could be harmful to our health in the long run a good alternative for protein in this case is fish and salmon in particular affords many nutritional benefits salmon could protect cognitive health researchers say salmon is packed with protein and also contains plenty of omega3 fatty acids which is said to be beneficial for eyesight research has demonstrated that omega3 protects against dryeye syndrome characterized by insufficient lubrication of the eyes which can lead to soreness and blurred vision moreover omega3 fatty acids have been associated with brain health and research suggests that they can stave off cognitive decline associated with aging salmon also has a high potassium content and according to a new study reported on mnt last autumn potassium can prevent the onset of heart disease additionally this type of fish is rich in the mineral selenium which contributes to the health of the thyroid gland the thyroid gland helps to regulate hormonal activity and is involved in metabolic processes what are the best diets for 2018 learn which diets researchers recommend for a healthy life read now although both farmed and wild salmon are available on the market wild salmon has been found to be more nutritious overall with a higher protein content and also to have less saturated fat which means that it is more healthful and better for weight management however farmed salmon is a more sustainable resource and specialists say that the differences between farmed and wild caught salmon may not be so stark as to motivate us to prefer one type over the other citrus fruits finally citrus fruits are the unsung heroes of a healthful diet these include a number of fruits that are now available worldwide such as oranges grapefruit lemons limes clementines mandarins and tangerines the flavonoids in citrus fruits have been cited in connection to longer lifespans for a long time citrus fruits have been recommended by nutritionists and grandmothers alike for their high content of vitamin c which has antioxidant properties and is said to bring a wide array of health benefits including to reduce inflammatory damage and to fend off infections specialists point out however that this type of fruits goes well beyond just vitamin c when it comes to nutritional content '' the fruits are abundant in other macronutrients including sugars dietary fiber potassium folate calcium thiamin niacin vitamin b6 phosphorus magnesium copper riboflavin and pantothenic acid '' if this list of dietary goodies hasnt colored you impressed the specialists then go on to explain how citrus fruits contain even more organic compounds such as flavonoids coumarins and carotenoids that have been said to have protective effects against cancer cardiovascular diseases and neurodegenerative diseases research has shown that flavonoids in which citrus fruits are particularly rich can `` prevent or delay chronic diseases caused by obesity '' flavonoids have also garnered a lot of scientific attention for their anticancer potential and consumption of especially flavonoidrich citrus fruits has been associated with a significantly prolonged lifespan the inhabitants of the japanese prefecture of okinawa known to be some of the longestliving populations of the world regularly eat shikuwasa also known as `` shequasar '' a citrus fruit typical of the region which contains more flavonoids than most other citrus fruits drinking shikuwasa juice rich in flavonoid content has also been linked to better liver health although all of the foods mentioned above are appreciated for their significant health benefits we should not forget that wellbeing and longevity can not be achieved without a balanced inclusive diet and a healthful lifestyle moreover current studies suggest that our genetic makeup may have an important say as to which foods work best for our health so keeping our list of nutritious foods in mind make sure you follow the healthful diet that is most effective for youwhen it comes to new years resolutions eating better is at the top of our list but which diet plan is the best a panel of health experts on behalf of us news world report reveal the toprated diets for 2018 us news world report reveal the best diets for 2018 it is estimated that around 45 million people in the united states go on a diet each year with weight loss being the primary goal however whether youre dieting to lose weight or simply to improve overall health sticking to a specific eating plan can be challenging with so many diets to choose from how can you tell which one will work for you us news world report put together a panel of health experts every year to evaluate the most popular diets in the us this year the experts assessed 40 diets ranking them from lowest to highest in seven categories including the best diets for weight loss diabetes and heart health so we take a look at some of the key results the best diets for weight loss for the majority of dieters weight loss is the ultimate goal but losing weight and keeping it off is far from easy research suggests that approximately 30–35 percent of weight lost from dieting is regained within 1 year but it is possible to maintain weight loss its just a matter of finding the right eating plan the us news world report panel of experts evaluated 40 popular diets for their effects on both short and longterm weight loss noting that some people want to lose weight quickly while others want to maintain their weight loss for years to come the health experts rated weight watchers as the best diet on both accounts scoring 4 out of 5 for shortterm weight loss and 35 out of 5 for longterm weight loss a highfat diet without the weight gain study says its possible researchers say that there could be a way to avoid weight gain due to a highfat diet read now one of the longestrunning wellknown commercial diets weight watchers incorporates a points system wherein foods and beverages are assigned points based on their nutritional values and dieters are assigned a daily points allowance according to us news world report the expert panel `` appreciated the programs support system which helps dieters keep the pounds off '' the volumetrics diet came in at second place for best weight loss diet scoring 38 out of 5 for shortterm weight loss and 33 out of 5 for longterm weight loss designed by barbara rolls who is a professor of nutrition working at pennsylvania state university in centre county the volumetrics diet focuses on putting foods with lowenergy density such as lowfat milk grains and nonstarchy fruits and vegetables at the forefront of ones diet as well as limiting foods with highenergy density the best diets for heart health heart disease is the leading cause of death for men and women in the us killing around 610000 people in the country every year a poor diet can increase the risk of heart disease because eating food high in fat can lead to high blood pressure high cholesterol levels and obesity which are major risk factors for the condition but which eating plan is best for a healthy heart for this category the health experts analyzed each of the 40 diets and gave them average hearthealth ratings the dietary approaches to stop hypertension dash diet took first place in this category developed by the national heart lung and blood institute a part of the national institutes of health nih the dash diet is high in fruits vegetables whole grains fish poultry and lowfat dairy but it limits foods high in sugar and saturated and trans fats the dash diet was also ranked the best overall diet the mediterranean diet which emphasizes consuming fish and seafood at least twice weekly alongside regular consumption of fruits vegetables legumes and whole grains took joint second place for best hearthealthy diet alongside the ornish diet with the ornish diet fat is limited to 10 percent of daily calories and foods are divided into five groups from the least to most healthful the best diets for diabetes the mediterranean diet not only ranked highly for one of the best hearthealthy diets but it also took the crown for the best diabetes diet scoring 37 out of 5 it is estimated that around 303 million people in the us are living with diabetes wherein blood glucose levels become too high due to the bodys inability to produce or effectively use insulin although eating a healthful diet is important for all of us people with diabetes need to be extra cautious skipping meals or eating the wrong foods may lead to problematic highs and lows in blood glucose levels according to the panel `` the mediterranean diet is a great option for preventing or controlling diabetes some research has shown that diabetics on a mediterranean diet may improve their levels of hemoglobin a1c a measure of blood sugar over time '' the dash diet makes yet another appearance here ranking second in the best diabetes diet category with the experts noting that `` its menu looks a lot like widely accepted nutritional guidelines for those with the condition '' whichever eating plan that you decide is best for you its important to note that physical activity is just as important as the foods you eat current guidelines recommend that adults should engage in at least 150 minutes of moderateintensity or 75 minutes of vigorousintensity aerobic activity every weeka small pilot study of older people suggests that taking a daily supplement of a nutrient that is present naturally in foods may improve artery health and blood pressure a certain type of supplement may promote healthy arterial aging and reduced blood pressure the researchers at the university of colorado boulder found that the supplement called nicotinamide riboside mimics some of the effects of caloric restriction and activates several identical biological pathways studies of caloric restriction which have been done mainly in rodents and fruit flies and not so much in humans indicate that reducing daily calorie intake by a third may delay the aging process and lengthen lifespan the new study found that taking nicotinamide riboside supplements significantly improved blood pressure in people with mild hypertension or elevated blood pressure should the results be confirmed in a larger clinical trial the researchers think that they could have important implications in biomedicine such as increasing treatment options for elevated blood pressure elevated blood pressure and stage 1 high blood pressure are now defined as a blood pressure of 12080 or 13989 millimeters of mercury respectively which although is not high enough to justify medication is high enough to raise the risk for a heart attack or stroke currently the recommended options for people with elevated blood pressure include changes to diet and increasing physical activity senior study author doug seals who is a professor and researcher in the department of integrative physiology and his colleagues report their findings in a paper due to be published in the journal nature communications stiff arteries blood pressure and aging in a western culture stiffer arteries and the high blood pressure that results from them as we age is so common that it is accepted as a normal consequence of aging for example the american heart associations aha explanation of high blood pressure states `` the normal aging process can cause the big elastic arteries to become stiff over time '' in the united states an estimated 103 million adults have high blood pressure and this figure is expected to rise as the population continues to age however there is evidence that stiff arteries and high blood pressure are not necessarily a normal consequence of aging although genetics plays a role preserving artery health as we reach our 70s and beyond also depends on things that we can do something about such as lifestyle and diet nicotinamide riboside nicotinamide riboside is a trace nutrient present in certain foods such as cows milk and in higher concentrations in dietary supplement form studies have indicated that the nutrient contains `` unique properties as a vitamin b3 '' that include raising insulin sensitivity boosting the effects of exercise protecting the brain and resisting the harmful effects of a highfat diet high cholesterol in late life may mean better brain health learn how having a total cholesterol level higher in later life than it was in midlife is linked to a lower risk of marked cognitive decline read now for their study prof seals and his colleagues recruited 24 lean and healthy men and women from the boulder area their ages ranged from 55 to 79 and they were put into two groups one of the groups took 500 milligrams of nicotinamide riboside chloride twice per day for 6 weeks then spent another 6 weeks taking a placebo the other group followed the opposite pattern they took a placebo for 6 weeks and then a twicedaily 500milligram dose of nicotinamide riboside chloride for another 6 weeks the team analyzed blood samples that the subjects gave at the end of each treatment period and they took other `` physiological measurements '' at these times there were no serious side effects an evolutionary survival mechanism the results showed that taking 1000 milligrams of nicotinamide riboside each day increased levels of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide nad+ by 60 percent nad+ is a compound that activates sirtuins a group of enzymes thought to be responsible for the beneficial effects that calorie restriction has on healthy aging and longevity the compound levels of which tend to wane with age is involved in many of the bodys metabolic processes there is a theory which is supported by research that our bodies are programmed by evolution to conserve nad+ when food is scarce and that this is activated when we restrict calorie intake more recent research has also begun to investigate the possibility that older adults might regain this protective property and age more healthily by taking supplements of `` nad+ precursors '' such as nicotinamide riboside the results also found that nicotinamide riboside supplementation caused a drop in systolic blood pressure of 10 points in 13 of the participants who had elevated blood pressure or stage 1 high blood pressure this represents a 25 percent reduction in the risk of having a heart attack more work now needed to confirm findings the researchers conclude that their paper is a step forward in highlighting the potential benefits of nicotinamide riboside supplementation in older adults however they point out that there is still a lot of work to do to confirm that it is safe and effective they hope to investigate the specific impact of nicotinamide riboside on artery health and blood pressure more robustly in a larger clinical trial in the meantime another trial is about to investigate the effect of the supplement in older people with mild cognitive impairment a condition that often precedes alzheimers disease '' this was the first ever study to give this novel compound to humans over a period of time we found that it is welltolerated and appears to activate some of the same key biological pathways that calorie restriction does '' prof doug seals the study was partfunded by chromadex who make the supplements that the researchers usedapps are available for everything these days from shopping to entertainment and travel apps that claim to help look after your mental health and wellbeing are also available so we have selected the best apps for mental health mental health apps may help with conditions such as anxiety and depression as well as enhance psychological wellbeing approximately 483 million adults in the united states are faced with a mental health condition each year and 98 million of those are serious conditions that limit the activities of everyday life among us adults aged 18–44 mood disorders such as depression and bipolar disorder are now the third most common reason for hospitalizations furthermore those who live with severe mental illness are more likely to face chronic medical conditions and die around 25 years earlier exercising regularly and eating a healthful diet can boost mental health and wellbeing significantly help to reduce symptoms of depression anxiety and stress and increase endorphins responsible for happiness apps focus on protecting or improving mental health using methods including meditation hypnosis cognitive behavioral therapy cbt and providing a valuable support network medical news today have put together a list of the top 10 apps that can help to enhance your wellbeing and look after your mental health calm android free iphone free calm was branded as apples `` app of the year '' in 2017 the app is designed to reduce anxiety improve sleep and help you to feel happier calm focuses on the four key areas of meditation breathing sleep and relaxation with the aim of bringing joy clarity and peace to your daily life the app delivers meditations that can help you to destress as well as breathing programs music and sounds from nature to relax your mind and body and promote better sleep calm is the perfect app if you are new to meditation but it also offers programs for more advanced users meditation sessions are available in lengths of 3–25 minutes to fit in with your schedule headspace android free iphone free headspace uses mindfulness and meditation to help you perform at your best each day the apps mission is to provide you with the essential tools to achieve a happier healthier life whether you need to build healthier relationships find a place of calm keep your mind fit or reduce stress headspace has hundreds of themed mindfulness and meditation sessions to support you the app reports that meditation reduces daily stress and improves focus and attention what is more using headspace is suggested to enhance compassionate behavior toward others in just 3 weeks moodnotes iphone $ 399 moodnotes is a thought journal and mood diary the app can be used to capture your feelings and improve your thinking habits through the implementation of cbt and positive psychology track your mood and increase selfawareness of what influences it learn to recognize `` traps '' in your thinking and ways to rethink the situation if you happen to enter a `` thinking trap '' moodnotes will provide suggestions and useful perspectives to reduce stress and enhance wellbeing progress is viewable in the helpful `` insights '' dashboard googleadslotinfopush { '' slotname '' mnt_dlb1 '' slotcontainer '' mnt_dlb1_container } moodpath android free iphone free moodpath is your pocketsized mental health companion whether you are facing a rough patch or have concerns about your mental health the apps goal is to support you through the difficult times and guide you out the other side moodpath asks daily questions in order to assess your wellbeing and screen for symptoms of depression the screening progress aims to increase your awareness of your thoughts emotions and feelings after a period of 2 weeks the app generates an electronic document that you can discuss with a healthcare professional more than 150 videos and psychological exercises are available to help you understand your mood and strengthen your mental health pacifica android free iphone free pacifica is an app with anxiety and stress in mind it provides a toolbox to deal with daily anxiety and stress along with a highly supportive community of likeminded individuals pacifica helps you to break cycles of unhelpful thoughts feelings and behaviors through methods such as cbt mindfulness meditation mood tracking and relaxation the app houses audio lessons and activities that help you to cope with stress and depression and it sets daily challenges to help you tackle anxiety one day at a time and reach your longterm goals superbetter android free iphone free superbetter is a game focusing on increasing resilience and the ability to remain strong optimistic and motivated when presented with challenging obstacles in life a study by the university of pennsylvania in philadelphia found that when people played superbetter for 30 days their mood improved symptoms of anxiety and depression decreased and selfbelief to achieve goals increased the app will help you to adopt new habits improve your skills strengthen relationships complete meaningful projects and achieve lifelong dreams superbetter also has the potential to help you beat depression and anxiety cope with chronic illness and recover from posttraumatic stress disorder ptsd 7 cups android free iphone free if you are feeling lonely sad stressed or worried 7 cups could be the perfect app for you it provides online therapy and emotional support for anxiety and depression there are more than 160000 trained listeners and licensed therapists who are available to anonymously speak with 247 speak your mind and confide in listeners without the fear of being judged these listeners can be searched for based on their experience or their specialties such as bullying panic attacks eating disorders relationship breakups and many more affordable therapy with an online therapist can commence onetoone in a confidential setting anxiety relief hypnosis android free iphone free anxiety relief hypnosis is an app suggested to help improve relaxation and reduce anxiety within just 1–3 weeks of use the apps developers say that hypnosis can decrease anxious thoughts and enhance your response to relaxation which in turn resets your behavior and enables an improved response to stress the app provides an audio session read by a certified hypnotherapist together with calming music and sounds from nature to aid relaxation the `` awaken at end '' feature can be disabled to allow you to fall into restful sleep at bedtime happify android free iphone free happify is a space to overcome negative thoughts and stress and build resilience whether you are feeling stressed anxious or sad happify helps you to regain control of your thoughts and feelings in fact 86 percent of the apps users report feeling better about their lives after 2 months of using it happify employs techniques and evidencebased interventions in the areas of cbt positive psychology and mindfulness to help you break old and unhealthful patterns and form new healthful habits the app offers activities and games to improve your life satisfaction and ability to fight negativity your emotional wellbeing is calculated as a happiness score that you can improve upon each week talkspace android free iphone free talkspace is a counseling and therapy app that connects users with a convenient affordable and confidential way to deal with anxiety stress depression relationship issues and chronic illness a free consultation is provided with a matching agent to identify the ideal therapist for your needs based on several factors more than 1000 licensed therapists are available who specialize in anxiety phobia depression domestic violence ptsd and more after upgrading and becoming a member access is given to a secure chat room wherein you can raise and discuss your worries with your private counselor the apps pricing plans are described as being approximately 80 percent lower than traditional officebased appointments how to be happy in 2018 find out how to maintain your happiness this year read nowcancer is the leading cause of death across the globe for years now researchers have led meticulous studies focused on how to stop this deadly disease in its tracks how close are we to finding more effective treatments how far has cancer research come the world health organization who note that worldwide nearly 1 in 6 deaths are down to cancer in the united states alone the national cancer institute nci estimated 1688780 new cancer cases and 600920 cancerrelated deaths in 2017 currently the most common types of cancer treatment are chemotherapy radiotherapy tumor surgery and in the case prostate cancer and breast cancer hormonal therapy however other types of treatment are beginning to pick up steam therapies that on their own or in combination with other treatments are meant to help defeat cancer more efficiently and ideally have fewer side effects innovations in cancer treatment aim to address a set of issues that will typically face healthcare providers and patients including aggressive treatment accompanied by unwanted side effects tumor recurrence after treatment surgery or both and aggressive cancers that are resilient to widely utilized treatments below we review some of the most recent cancer research breakthroughs that give us renewed hope that better therapies and prevention strategies will soon follow suit boosting the immune systems arsenal one type of therapy that has attracted a lot of attention recently is immunotherapy which aims to reinforce our own bodies existing arsenal against foreign bodies and harmful cells our immune systems response to the spread of cancer tumors but many types of cancer cell are so dangerous because they have ways of `` duping '' the immune system either into ignoring them altogether or else into giving them a `` helping hand '' lung cancer tumor growth halved with new approach to stop cancer from spreading we may have to look at mysterious noncoding molecules a recent study suggests read now therefore some types of aggressive cancer are able to spread more easily and become resistant to chemotherapy or radiotherapy however thanks to in vitro and in vivo experiments researchers are now learning how they might be able to `` deactivate '' the cancer cells protective systems a study published last year in nature immunology found that macrophages or white blood cells that are normally tasked with `` eating up '' cellular debris and other harmful foreign `` objects '' failed to obliterate the superaggressive cancer cells that was because in their interaction with the cancer cells the macrophages read not one but two signals meant to repel their `` cleansing '' action this knowledge however also showed the scientists the way forward by blocking the two relevant signaling pathways they reenabled the white blood cells to do their work therapeutic viruses and innovative vaccines a surprising weapon in the fight against cancer could be therapeutic viruses as revealed by a team from the united kingdom earlier this year in their experiments they managed to use a reovirus to attack brain cancer cells while leaving healthy cells alone '' this is the first time it has been shown that a therapeutic virus is able to pass through the brainblood barrier '' explained the study authors which `` opens up the possibility that this type of immunotherapy could be used to treat more people with aggressive brain cancers '' another area for improvement in immunotherapy is `` dendritic vaccines '' a strategy wherein dendritic cells which play a key role in the bodys immune response are collected from a persons body `` armed '' with tumorspecific antigens which will teach them to `` hunt '' and destroy relevant cancer cells and injected back into the body to boost the immune system in a new study researchers in switzerland identified a way to improve the action of these dendritic vaccines by creating artificial receptors able to recognize and `` abduct '' tiny vesicles that have been linked to cancer tumors spread in the body by attaching these artificial receptors to the dendritic cells in the `` vaccines '' the therapeutic cells are enabled to recognize harmful cancer cells with more accuracy importantly recent studies have shown that immunotherapy may work best if delivered in tandem with chemotherapy specifically if the chemotherapy drugs are delivered first and they are followed up with immunotherapy but this approach does have some pitfalls it is difficult to control the effects of this combined method so sometimes healthy tissue may be attacked alongside cancer tumors however scientists from two institutions in north carolina have developed a substance that once injected into the body becomes gellike a `` bioresponsive scaffold system '' the scaffold can hold both chemotherapy and immunotherapy drugs at once releasing them systematically into primary tumors this method allows for a better control of both therapies ensuring that the drugs act on the targeted tumor alone the nanoparticle revolution speaking of specially developed tools for delivering drugs straight to the tumor and hunting down micro tumors with accuracy and efficiency the past couple of years have seen a `` boom '' in nanotechnology and nanoparticle developments for cancer treatments nanoparticles could be a gamechanger in cancer treatment nanoparticles are microscopic particles that have garnered so much attention in clinical research among other fields because they bring us the chance to develop precise less invasive methods of tackling disease vitally they can target cancer cells or cancer tumors without harming healthy cells in the surrounding environment some nanoparticles have now been created to provide very focused hyperthermic treatment which is a type of therapy that uses hot temperatures to make cancer tumors shrink last year scientists from china and the uk managed to come up with a type of `` selfregulating '' nanoparticle that was able to expose tumors to heat while avoiding contact with healthy tissue '' this could potentially be a gamechanger in the way we treat people who have cancer '' said one of the researchers in charge of this project these tiny vehicles can also be used to target cancer stemlike cells which are undifferentiated cells that have been linked to the resilience of certain types of cancer in the face of traditional treatments such as chemotherapy thus nanoparticles can be `` loaded '' with drugs and set to `` hunt down '' cancer stem cells to prevent the growth or recurrence of tumors scientists have experimented with drugfilled nanoparticles in the treatment of various types of cancer including breast cancer and endometrial cancer no less importantly minuscule vehicles called `` nanoprobes '' can be used to detect the presence of micrometastases which are secondary tumors so tiny that they can not be seen using traditional methods dr steven k libutti director of the rutgers cancer institute of new jersey in new brunswick calls micrometastases `` the achilles heel of surgical management for cancer '' and argues that nanoprobes `` go a long way to solving such problems '' tumor starvation strategies another type of strategy that researchers have been investigating of late is that of `` starving '' tumors of the nutrients they need to grow and spread this scientists point out could be a saving grace in the case of aggressive resilient cancers that can not effectively be eradicated otherwise one novel method of attacking cancer is by starving cancer cells to death three different studies whose results were all published in january this year looked at ways of cutting off cancers nutritional supplies one of these studies looked at ways of stopping glutamine a naturally occurring amino acid from feeding cancer cells certain cancers such as breast lung and colon are known to use this amino acid to support their growth by blocking cancer cells access to glutamine the researchers managed to maximize the impact of oxidative stress a process that eventually induces cell death on these cells some aggressive types of breast cancer may be halted by stopping the cells from `` feeding '' on a particular enzyme that helps them to produce the energy they need to thrive another way of depleting cancer cells of energy is by blocking their access to vitamin b2 as researchers from the university of salford in the uk have observed as one study author says `` this is hopefully the beginning of an alternative approach to halting cancer stem cells '' this strategy could help individuals receiving cancer treatment to avoid the toxic side effects of chemotherapy cancer treatments and epigenetics epigenetics refers to the changes caused in our bodies by alterations in gene expression which dictate whether certain characteristics appear or if certain `` actions '' are affected at a biological level according to research that addressed the impact of such changes many cancers as well as the behaviors of cancer cells are determined by epigenetic factors '' recent advances in the field of epigenetics have shown that human cancer cells harbor global epigenetic abnormalities in addition to numerous genetic alterations '' '' these genetic and epigenetic alterations interact at all stages of cancer development working together to promote cancer progression '' thus it is crucial for specialists to understand when and where to intervene and the expression of which genes they may need to switch on or off depending on their role in the development of cancer one study for instance found that the gene responsible for the advent of huntingtons disease produces a set of molecules whose action may actually prevent cancer from occurring now the researchers challenge is to channel the therapeutic potential of this process without triggering huntingtons disease however the scientists are hopeful '' we believe a shortterm treatment cancer therapy for a few weeks might be possible '' says the studys senior author another recent study was able to establish that estrogenreceptor positive breast cancers that become resistant to chemotherapy gain their resilience through genetic mutations that `` confer a metastatic advantage to the tumor '' but this knowledge also gave researchers the `` break '' that they needed to come up with an improved treatment for such stubborn tumors a combination therapy that delivers the chemotherapeutic drug fulvestrant alongside an experimental enzyme inhibitor what does this all mean cancer research is running at full speed taking advantage of all the technological advances that science has achieved over recent years but what does that mean in terms of coming up with a cure for cancer whether or not there will ever be a cure for all cancer types is currently a matter of strong debate although promising studies are published and covered by the media almost every day cancer types vary immensely this makes it very difficult to say that an approach that works for one type will be adaptable to all also while there is much emerging research promising more effective treatments most of these projects are still in their early stages having conducted in vitro and in vivo experiments some potential treatments still have a long way to go before clinical trials in human patients still that doesnt mean we should lose all hope some researchers explain that these efforts should make us optimistic while we may not be at the stage where we can claim that cancer can easily be eradicated our furthered knowledge and ever more precise tools keep us ahead of the game and improve our odds in the fight against this diseasenew research published in the journal aging finds a compound that stops cancer cells from spreading by starving them of vitamin b2 the findings may revolutionize traditional chemotherapy current chemotherapy has a wide range of serious side effects but that may be about to change suggests new research a team of britishbased researchers set out to find a nontoxic therapeutic agent that targets the mitochondria of cancer cells mitochondria are energyproducing organelles found inside each cell the compound recently found by the scientists can stop cancer stemlike cells from proliferating by interfering with their energycreating process inside the mitochondria the team was led by prof michael lisanti the chair of translational medicine at the university of salford in the united kingdom and the new study can be accessed here starving cancer cells of energy prof lisanti and his colleagues used drugscreening to identify the compound which is called diphenyleneiodonium chloride dpi as the researchers explain various cell assays and other cell culture experiments revealed that dpi reduced over 90 percent of the energy produced in the cells mitochondria dpi achieved this by blocking vitamin b2 also known as riboflavin which depleted the cells of energy '' our observation is that dpi is selectively attacking the cancer stem cells by effectively creating a vitamin deficiency in other words by turning off energy production in cancer stem cells we are creating a process of hibernation '' prof michael lisanti the cancer stem cells are the ones that produce the tumor `` its extraordinary '' continues prof lisanti `` the cells just sit there as if in a state of suspended animation '' importantly dpi proved to be nontoxic for socalled `` bulk '' cancer cells which are largely thought to be nontumorigenic is chemo at the heart of cancer regrowth paradoxically the very treatment that is supposed to stop cancer from spreading sometimes enables it to do so read now this suggests that the compound might be successful where current chemotherapy fails the team explains `` dpi treatment can be used to acutely confer a mitochondrialdeficient phenotype which we show effectively depletes cancer stemlike cells from the heterogeneous cancer cell population '' '' these findings have significant therapeutic implications for potently targeting cancer stemlike cells while minimizing toxic side effects '' they add a new era of chemotherapy '' we believe '' say the scientists `` that dpi is one of the most potent and highly selective cancer stemlike cells inhibitors discovered to date '' the findings are particularly significant given the dire need for nontoxic cancer therapies and the serious side effects of conventional chemotherapy '' the beauty of dpi is that it makes the cancer stem cells metabolically inflexible so that they will be highly susceptible to many other drugs '' explains prof lisanti study coauthor prof federica sotgia also comments on the significance of the recent findings saying `` in terms of chemotherapies for cancer we clearly need something better than what we have at present and this is hopefully the beginning of an alternative approach to halting cancer stem cells '' in fact the authors specialize in finding alternative nontoxic therapies and they hope that their most recent findings will mark the beginning of a new era of chemotherapy perhaps one that uses nontoxic molecules to target the mitochondrial activity of cancer stemlike cells the researchers propose to call these new molecules `` mitoflavoscins ''periods usually arrive once each month but the exact date flow cramp severity and accompanying symptoms are not quite that consistent for this very reason the app market is flooded with period trackers that aim to offer insight into your monthly cycle period tracking apps can help you to learn more about your cycle and plan for future periods bleeding occurs every 28 days for the majority of women but it is common for the menstrual cycle to be either shorter or longer in duration and for bleeding to start anywhere from day 21 to day 40 period length may also vary and last for 3–8 days with an average of 5 days bleeding is often heaviest on days 1 and 2 and starts to become lighter thereafter tracking your period can be useful for several reasons period tracking can help you to get to know your own body and cycle and observe any symptoms such as mood swings or headaches that may occur during a particular phase of your cycle period tracking can help to identify any changes to your menstrual cycle that may be an indicator of potential health issues furthermore using period tracking apps can tell you when you are likely to be most fertile if you are avoiding pregnancy or trying to become pregnant there are hundreds of apps that track and analyze the menstrual cycle so how do you know which one is the best fit for you medical news today have tried and tested apps galore to bring you a selection of the top 10 apps to start tracking your period today period calendar android free iphone free period calendar can help to track and predict your period plus provide information on your fertile window and potential ovulation date in addition to the basic menstrual cycle tracking function the app can be used to record temperature intercourse birth control weight cervical mucus mood and any other symptoms the pill reminder ensures that you will never forget a dose ever again whether you need to remember to take medications supplements birth control pills or even an injection the pill tracker can be set up to remind you flo period tracker android free iphone free if you are wondering when you last had a period or would like to know when your next one is due you can easily find out using flo flo uses machine learning to accurately and reliably predict menstruation and ovulation using the apps bold and simple calendar you will be able to log how you are feeling your symptoms sex drive and menstruation flow the app can also be used to track sleep water consumption and physical activity the insights dashboard helps you to learn more about your body and cycle and it also provides personalized health insights each day clue android free iphone free clue has been ranked as the top period and ovulation tracking app by the obstetrics gynecology journal which is a publication of the american college of obstetricians and gynecologists clue uses science to help its users to identify unique patterns in their menstrual cycle with the apps period tracker multiple mood trackers health logs and exercise trackers your health and menstrual cycle will no longer be a mystery the developers promise to be inclusive of all ages and never use butterflies flowers euphemisms or pink the apps unique algorithm learns from the data that you add which means that the more you use clue the smarter it will become my calendar android free iphone free my calendar is a sophisticated elegant and very customizable period tracker it can help those with irregular cycles as well as people who have worries about conceiving birth control and contraception with my calendar you can track regular and irregular periods temperature weight moods symptoms and blood flow with its discreet reminders you can be prepared for approaching periods along with ovulation and fertile days you can access all your essential information using the health tracker at a glance and the calendar can be passwordprotected to ensure that your information remains private glow android free iphone free glow can track your period and record your symptoms mood sexual activity and medications glows datadriven menstrual and ovulation calculator helps women to take control of their reproductive health the app can forecast periods and ovulation and its predictions become smarter over time not only can the app help women who are avoiding or attempting pregnancy but it also helps those who are undergoing fertility treatments such as intrauterine insemination and in vitro fertilization you can make charts of your menstrual and fertility data set medication birth control and ovulation reminders as well as log more than 40 different health signals glow also offers a subscription to unlock comparative insights premium articles private messaging and premium support eve android free iphone free eve is a savvy period tracker that predicts upcoming periods and your chances of pregnancy discover trends in your cycle by logging your moods and symptoms and view your health data in eyecatching charts with eve you can review past periods forecast future periods and ovulation and visualize your cycle history in a new way with eves interactive staircase the app provides access to a community where you can discuss periods sex and health if you are concerned about anything at all ask the community no subject is off limits and you can learn from those who have had similar experiences period tracker lite android free iphone free the period tracker lite app makes logging menstrual cycles quick and easy press a button at the start of each period and period tracker lite will record your data and use the average of 3 months worth of data to calculate your next period take notes each day about your symptoms such as flow cramps bloating backache headache and tender breasts your weight temperature and a choice of more than 30 moods can also be selected period dates fertility days and ovulation are all shown in a simple monthview calendar the app provides comprehensive charts that illustrate weight changes temperature period length cycle length and symptoms period plus iphone free period plus can help you to keep in touch with the duration of your menstrual cycles and tells you when the next one will begin the app sends you reminders of your next period and fertile window helping you to get to know your cycle and plan ahead with birth control pregnancy planning and even vacations period plus tracks period duration and intensity cramp intensity breast tenderness breakouts migraines basal body temperature cervical mucus sexual activity exercise pregnancy test results sleep patterns and more my cycles android free iphone free regardless of whether you are trying to conceive or become an expert on when your next period is due my cycles can help my cycles tracks periods in a handy calendar and predicts future ones wherever you are you can track your period symptoms mood and medications with my cycles in an instant record your periods view them at a glance with the easytoread calendar and plan periods fertile days and ovulation for the next 12 months if you are trying to get pregnant the app lets you know when your chances of conceiving are higher with helpful reminders likewise it tells you when to use extra protection if you are not trying to conceive cycles iphone free the cycles app is a simple period and fertility tracker that requires little input irrespective of having regular or irregular periods with cycles all you need to do is turn the dial on the first day of your period and thats it the app automatically adjusts your cycle length cycles is designed so that you can invite your partner to the app to keep up with your cycle this feature is useful so that your partner can provide emotional support plan trips and romantic evenings and know when your most fertile days are if you are trying to conceive the app uses scientifically backed fertility tracking that predicts fertility with an accuracy of up to 95 percent optional password protection keeps your information secure from prying eyes seven tips for relieving period bloating here are some tips about how to relieve periodrelating bloating read nowwant to get fit this year but dont know where to start we have chosen the best fitness blogs to empower you and help to get you started on your journey to tiptop physical fitness fitness blogs aim to inspire empower and motivate you to reach your health and fitness goals getting up off the couch and taking part in regular physical activity is one of the most important things you can do to ensure you remain healthy regular exercise can help to control your weight strengthen your bones and muscles and reduce your risk of cardiovascular disease type 2 diabetes and some cancers furthermore being active improves your mood mental health mobility and ability to complete tasks as an older adult as well as increases your chances of living longer adults are recommended to do at least 150 minutes of moderateintensity physical activity each week to achieve substantial health benefits and increase to 300 minutes for more extensive benefits if you are stuck on where to begin or are worried about getting injured the good news is that aerobic activity such as brisk walking is considered to be safe for most people hundreds of fitness blogs are also available to help you on your way and provide tips ideas and information on the best types of activity to boost fitness and instructions on how to do them medical news today have trawled through the many fitness blogs out there to bring you the top 10 fitness blogs for 2018 myfitnesspal blog myfitnesspal is a smartphone app and website that records physical activity and diet the app works out the optimal intake of calories and nutrients for the user to accomplish their goals and it uses elements of gaming to motivate them myfitnesspals blog focuses on providing easytoread information on eating psychology nutrition weight loss fitness inspiration workout guides and motivational support through the victory stories on the blog fitness posts include seven tips to lift weights without causing injury songs that should feature on your 2018 running playlist and brain and bodyboosting moves that you should add to your next walk visit the myfitnesspal blog natalie jill fitness natalie jill fitness was founded after natalie jill gained weight straight after losing her house retiring and ending her marriage she turned her life around and in the process became an inspiration to others natalie specializes in fitness weight loss healthy lifestyles and body weight training natalie coaches motivates and empowers people to stop making excuses and instead make solutions to become the best version of themselves recent posts on her blog include a bootybuilding workout to activate your glutes an upper body workout using just your body weight and how to do a chin up visit the natalie jill fitness blog ace ace is an acronym for the american council on exercise ace are a nonprofit organization that certifiy exercise professionals and health coaches aces vision is to get people moving and provide scientifically backed education to fitness professionals and health enthusiasts to make an impact on preventable diseases related to inactivity by 2035 their expert articles cover fitness topics such as exercises to improve agility lower body exercises to complete instead of doing squats and the many types of strength and their benefits visit the ace blog born fitness adam bornstein developed born fitness with the aim of taking the stress out of health nutrition and fitness whether you hope to lose weight gain muscle eat more healthfully or live longer born fitness provide solutions to fit your needs the born fitness team will help you to identify the diets strategies exercises and workouts that are best suited to you so that you can apply them to your life achieve your goals and live stronger and longer activities are available on the blog to suit all levels of fitness from beginner to advanced training posts include how to incorporate resistance bands into your routine preventing knee back and shoulder injuries during your workouts and the truth about the 7minute workout visit the born fitness blog the fitnessista the fitnessista is a healthy lifestyle blog written by gina harney who is a fitness instructor personal trainer and weight loss specialist based in san diego ca gina is a mom of two and she shares snippets of her family life on the blog along with quick effective workouts and healthful recipes that are super speedy to put together the latest posts on the fitnessista include things to help with fitness motivation the barre hiit workout that you can practice anywhere and a strength and cardio workout that can be completed on a park bench visit the fitnessista blog suzanne bowen fitness suzanne bowen compiled all of the training that she had received and given over the course of 16 years and created suzanne bowen fitness suzanne is also the creator of barreamped which is an internationally taught barre fitness technique regardless of whether you havent exercised for a while or if you are a seasoned expert suzanne has workouts that range from 10 minutes to over an hour that are effective for everyone the blog provides challenges and workouts to boost your fitness levels such as the crunchless abs workout a light weight routine for the upper body and a rebounding workout and its benefits visit the suzanne bowen fitness blog knockedup fitness erica ziel is a mother of three and the founder of knockedup fitness erica is a personal trainer and expert for fitnessinfused pilates with more than 10 years experience training numerous clients erica is an expert in prenatal and postnatal training and teaching women how to strengthen their core muscles for an easier pregnancy delivery and recovery the knockedup fitness blog delivers real and relevant topics to the busy mom or momtobe with articles such as why its important to properly strengthen your core how to prevent and relieve back pain during pregnancy and how movement can prepare your body for birth visit the knockedup fitness blog lisa gulley established workout mommy in 2007 to provide health and fitness information for moms lisa says that as a mom of four boys she is fully aware of how being a mom requires you to look after someone other than yourself 247 and that finding the time to exercise is a challenge lisa aims to provide the inspiration motivation and ideas you need to fit fitness exercise and health into your busy schedule and keep your sanity in check posts on workout mommy include ways to overcome a negative mindset tips on how to start a fitness routine and the types of cardio exercises that are best for women visit the workout mommy blog love sweat fitness katie dunlop is a certified personal trainer group fitness instructor and the creator of love sweat fitness she started love sweat fitness with the aim of inspiring women all over the world to find their happy and healthy body after college katie found herself overweight by 45 pounds and was fed up with trendy workouts and fad diets she decided to take her fitness and health into her own hands lost her excess weight and identified her true passion for helping women to reach their goals inspiring posts on katies blog include ways to make your morning workout the best part of your day five tips for a happier and healthier you this year and how to train for a 10k run visit the love sweat fitness blog nerd fitness nerd fitness say that they are a community of misfits mutants and underdogs that are ready to help you on your fitness journey whether you are overweight and frustrated in danger of serious health issues want to become a healthier parent or just want to look after or feel better about yourself nerd fitness aim to help you to make small changes so that you can live a happier healthier and more fulfilling life blog posts include the main differences between weight loss success and failure the number of calories you burn while walking and how to get strong like logan with the wolverine workout visit the nerd fitness blog the 10 best fitness apps pair these blogs with the apps listed here to boost your chances of becoming fit and healthy read nowa new study may have revealed a possible new prevention and treatment strategy for osteoarthritis which is one of the most common and debilitating agerelated diseases in the united states researchers suggest that increasing levels of foxo proteins could be one way to prevent and treat osteoarthritis researchers at the scripps research institute tsri in san diego ca reveal that proteins called foxo are key for joint health by boosting the levels of these foxo proteins they believe that it might be possible to treat osteoarthritis or even stop the disease from developing senior study author dr martin lotz from the department of molecular medicine at tsri and his team recently reported their results in the journal science translational medicine osteoarthritis also referred to as degenerative joint disease is estimated to affect more than 30 million adults in the united states making it the most common type of arthritis the condition is characterized by a breakdown of cartilage which is the tissue that cushions the joints of the bones osteoarthritis most commonly affects the knee hip and hand joints in a previous study dr lotz and team found that foxo levels in joint cartilage are reduced for this latest study the researchers sought to find out more about how foxo proteins affect joint health the effects of foxo deficiency in mice the researchers reached their findings by studying mice that were lacking foxo proteins in their joint cartilage compared with control mice the scientists found that foxodeficient mice experienced degeneration of the joints at a significantly younger age what is more the rodents with foxo deficiency showed greater susceptibility to cartilage damage during a treadmill test and they were also more likely to develop posttraumatic osteoarthritis due to knee injury osteoarthritis could this algae extract lead to a cure researchers reveal how an algae extract may offer a cure for osteoarthritis read now upon further investigation the scientists found that the foxodeficient mice showed abnormalities in a process called autophagy which is a natural process by which cells get rid of any unwanted or damaged components in order to maintain their health and carry out any repairs foxo deficiency also led to abnormalities in the processes that protect our cells against damage caused by free radicals additionally the study revealed that mice lacking foxo proteins failed to produce the required levels of a protein called lubricin which helps to protect joint cartilage against wear and tear the reduced production of lubricin was linked to a reduction in healthy cells in the `` superficial zone '' which is a layer of cartilage in the knee joint boosting foxo may prevent osteoarthritis so why does foxo cause these issues the researchers found that foxo proteins regulate the expression of genes that are important for joint health including those that control inflammation and autophagy the absence of foxo proteins in the joint cartilage leads to an increase in inflammation and a decrease in autophagy meaning that cells are unable to repair any damage '' the housekeeping mechanisms which keep cells healthy were not working in these knockout mice '' says dr lotz for the final part of their study the scientists wanted to see whether boosting foxo levels could restore these `` housekeeping mechanisms '' by increasing foxo expression in cells taken from people with osteoarthritis the researchers were able to normalize the expression of genes associated with inflammation and autophagy and the production of lubricin was also restored the team now plans to create molecules that can increase foxo levels and assess their effects in experimental osteoarthritis models '' drugs that boost the expression and activity of foxo could be a strategy for preventing and treating osteoarthritis '' dr martin lotzaccording to the national institutes of health people have used marijuana or cannabis to treat their ailments for at least 3000 years however the food and drug administration have not deemed marijuana safe or effective in the treatment of any medical condition although cannabidiol a substance that is present in marijuana received approval in june 2018 as a treatment for some types of epilepsy marijuana is being increasingly legalized in the us but is it safe this tension between a widespread belief that marijuana is an effective treatment for a wide assortment of ailments and a lack of scientific knowledge on its effects has been somewhat exacerbated in recent times by a drive toward legalization twentynine states plus the district of columbia have now made marijuana available for medical and in some states recreational purposes a recent study published in the journal addiction also found that use of marijuana is increasing sharply across the united states although this rise may not be linked to the legalization of marijuana in participating states nevertheless this rise in use is prompting major public health concerns in this article we look at the scientific evidence weighing the medical benefits of marijuana against its associated health risks in an attempt to answer this simple question is marijuana good or bad what are the medical benefits of marijuana over the years research has yielded results to suggest that marijuana may be of benefit in the treatment of some conditions these are listed below chronic pain last year a large review from the national academies of sciences engineering and medicine assessed more than 10000 scientific studies on the medical benefits and adverse effects of marijuana one area that the report looked closely at was the use of medical marijuana to treat chronic pain chronic pain is a leading cause of disability affecting more than 25 million adults in the us the review found that marijuana or products containing cannabinoids which are the active ingredients in marijuana or other compounds that act on the same receptors in the brain as marijuana are effective at relieving chronic pain alcoholism and drug addiction another comprehensive review of evidence published last year in the journal clinical psychology review revealed that using marijuana may help people with alcohol or opioid dependencies to fight their addictions but this finding may be contentious the national academies of sciences review suggests that marijuana use actually drives increased risk for abusing and becoming dependent on other substances also the more that someone uses marijuana the more likely they are to develop a problem with using marijuana individuals who began using the drug at a young age are also known to be at increased risk of developing a problem with marijuana use depression posttraumatic stress disorder and social anxiety the review published in clinical psychology review assessed all published scientific literature that investigated the use of marijuana to treat symptoms of mental illness evidence to date suggests that marijuana could help to treat some mental health conditions its authors found some evidence supporting the use of marijuana to relieve depression and posttraumatic stress disorder symptoms that being said they caution that marijuana is not an appropriate treatment for some other mental health conditions such as bipolar disorder and psychosis the review indicates that there is some evidence to suggest that marijuana might alleviate symptoms of social anxiety but again this is contradicted by the national academies of sciences engineering and medicine review which instead found that regular users of marijuana may actually be at increased risk of social anxiety cancer evidence suggests that oral cannabinoids are effective against nausea and vomiting caused by chemotherapy and some small studies have found that smoked marijuana may also help to alleviate these symptoms alcohol more damaging to brain health than marijuana a recent study suggests that alcohol may cause more harm to the brain than marijuana read now some studies on cancer cells suggest that cannabinoids may either slow down the growth of or kill some types of cancer however early studies that tested this hypothesis in humans revealed that although cannabinoids are a safe treatment they are not effective at controlling or curing cancer multiple sclerosis the shortterm use of oral cannabinoids may improve symptoms of spasticity among people with multiple sclerosis but the positive effects have been found to be modest epilepsy in june 2018 the food and drug administration fda approved the use of a medication containing cannabidiol cbd to treat two rare severe and specific types of epilepsy called lennoxgastaut syndrome and dravet syndrome that are difficult to control with other types of medication this cbdbased drug is known as epidiolex cbd is one of many substances that occurs in cannabis it is not psychoactive the drug for treating these conditions involves a purified form of cbd the approval was based on the findings of research and clinical trials a study published in 2017 found that the use of cbd resulted in far fewer seizures among children with dravet syndrome compared with a placebo dravet syndrome seizures are prolonged repetitive and potentially lethal in fact 1 in 5 children with dravet syndrome do not reach the age of 20 years in the study 120 children and teenagers with dravet syndrome all of whom were aged between 2 and 18 were randomly assigned to receive an oral cbd solution or a placebo for 14 weeks along with their usual medication the researchers found that the children who received the cbd solution went from having around 12 seizures per month to an average of six seizures per month three children receiving cbd did not experience any seizures at all children who received the placebo also saw a reduction in seizures but this was slight their average number of seizures went down from 15 each month before the study to 14 seizures per month during the study the researchers say that this 39 percent reduction in seizure occurrence provides strong evidence that the compound can help people living with dravet syndrome and that their paper has the first rigorous scientific data to demonstrate this however the study also found a high rate of side effects linked to cbd more than 9 in 10 of the children treated with cbd experienced side effects most commonly vomiting fatigue and fever the patient information leaflet for epidiolex warns of side effects such as liver damage sedation and thoughts of suicide what are the health risks of marijuana at the other end of the spectrum is the plethora of studies that have found negative associations between marijuana use and health they are listed below mental health problems daily marijuana use is believed to exacerbate existing symptoms of bipolar disorder among people who have this mental health problem however the national academies of sciences engineering and medicine report suggests that among people with no history of the condition there is only limited evidence of a link between marijuana use and developing bipolar disorder moderate evidence suggests that regular marijuana users are more likely to experience suicidal thoughts and there is a small increased risk of depression among marijuana users marijuana use is likely to increase risk of psychosis including schizophrenia but a curious finding among people with schizophrenia and other psychoses is that a history of marijuana use is linked with improved performance on tests assessing learning and memory testicular cancer although there is no evidence to suggest any link between using marijuana and an increased risk for most cancers the national academies of sciences did find some evidence to suggest an increased risk for the slowgrowing seminoma subtype of testicular cancer respiratory disease regular marijuana smoking is linked to increased risk of chronic cough but `` it is unclear '' whether smoking marijuana worsens lung function or increases the risk of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or asthma a 2014 study that explored the relationship between marijuana use and lung disease suggested that it was plausible that smoking marijuana could contribute to lung cancer though it has been difficult to conclusively link the two the authors of that study published in the journal current opinion in pulmonary medicine conclude '' there is unequivocal evidence that habitual or regular marijuana smoking is not harmless a caution against regular heavy marijuana usage is prudent '' '' the medicinal use of marijuana is likely not harmful to lungs in low cumulative doses '' they add `` but the dose limit needs to be defined recreational use is not the same as medicinal use and should be discouraged '' so is marijuana good or bad for your health there is evidence that demonstrates both the harms and health benefits of marijuana yet despite the emergence over the past couple of years of very comprehensive uptodate reviews of the scientific studies evaluating the benefits and harms of the drug its clear that more research is needed to fully determine the public health implications of rising marijuana use more research is needed to confirm the harms and benefits of marijuana use many scientists and health bodies including the american cancer society acs support the need for further scientific research on the use of marijuana and cannabinoids to treat medical conditions however there is an obstacle to this marijuana is classed as a schedule i controlled substance by the drug enforcement administration which deters the study of marijuana and cannabinoids through its imposition of strict conditions on the researchers working in this area if you happen to live in a state where medical use of marijuana is legal you and your doctor will need to carefully consider these factors and how they relate to your illness and health history before using this drug for instance while there is some evidence to support the use for marijuana for pain relief you should certainly avoid marijuana if you have a history of mental health problems remember to always speak to your doctor before taking a new medicinewith so many diet types to choose from how do we know which one will suit us best one problem that may face us is deciding whether to go lowfat or lowcarb what does research have to say about it one of the most difficult decisions when it comes to weight loss diets is picking one that will work well for you keto diets mediterranean diets fasting diets there are so many options out there for people who want to lose weight however choosing a diet is tricky how do we know which one will work best for us or if the diet will work at all researchers at the stanford university school of medicine in california have recently conducted a study exploring one key aspect of this `` best diet '' question whether lowfat or lowcarb diets are more effective what lead study author prof christopher gardner and colleagues found however might only make the matter more complicated '' weve all heard stories '' says prof gardner `` of a friend who went on one diet it worked great and then another friend tried the same diet and it didnt work at all its because were all very different and were just starting to understand the reasons for this diversity '' '' maybe we shouldnt be asking whats the best diet but whats the best diet for whom '' prof christopher gardner prof gardner and team worked with 609 people aged 18–50 with an almost 5050 maletofemale ratio the participants were split into two groups and randomly assigned one of two diets lowcarb or lowfat all of the study participants followed their assigned diet for a full year the results of the researchers study are now published in the journal jama opt for natural foods in order to gain a better understanding of the factors that might drive weight gain and weight loss prof gardner and team also sequenced the participants genomes in doing so they looked for gene patterns that they could associate with the effectiveness fat or carb metabolism another test measured all the subjects insulin levels which have previously been associated with weight gain in some people cant keep the weight off this may be why why are our bodies so stubborn when it comes to weight management a new study sheds light read now for the first 8 weeks of their respective diets the participants were instructed to consume no more than 20 grams of either fats or carbs per day this the authors explain would be the equivalent of one and a half slices of wholewheat bread for carbs or a large handful of nuts in the case of fats from the second month of their diet onward the participants were allowed to make adjustments as needed adding back 5 –15 grams of either carbs or fat little by little the purpose of these adjustments was to encourage the participants to strike a nutritional balance that they would be comfortable adhering to in the long run beyond the `` confines '' of the study '' we wanted them to choose '' says prof gardner `` a lowfat or lowcarb diet plan that they could potentially follow forever rather than a diet that theyd drop when the study ended '' as the year drew to a close those who had been following a lowfat diet had a daily fat intake of 57 grams on average compared with 87 grams per day before the start of the study those on a lowcarb diet had a daily carb intake of approximately 132 grams versus 247 grams before the study started participants lost an average of 13 pounds over the 1year period the scientists were pleased with the impact that the study had on the participants dietary health stressing that one of its main achievements was to encourage them to switch to healthful sources of fats and carbs '' we made sure to tell everybody '' adds prof gardner `` regardless of which diet they were on to go to the farmers market and dont buy processed convenience food also we advised them to diet in a way that didnt make them feel hungry or deprived '' study opens the door to further questions after measuring participants baseline insulin levels and weight loss progress throughout the study the researchers saw that although they had all transitioned to more healthful eating habits there was still a lot of individual variance when it came to weight loss thus while some participants lost more than 60 pounds others gained 15–20 pounds however the researchers were unable to find any links between gene patterns or insulin output and a persons likelihood of thriving on a lowfat versus lowcarb diet '' this study closes the door on some questions but it opens the door to others we have gobs of data that we can use in secondary exploratory studies '' prof gardner notes the researchers next step from here therefore will be to look at all the different data collected throughout the current study and try to understand how individual dietary needs might be calculated in the future '' i still think there is an opportunity to discover some personalization to it now we just need to work on tying the pieces together '' says prof gardner in the meantime the researchers encourage people on a weight loss journey to just be more mindful about what they eat since that will be the first step to a more healthful lifestyle '' on both sides referring to lowcarb and lowfat dieters we heard from people who had lost the most weight that we had helped them change their relationship to food and that now they were more thoughtful about how they ate '' prof gardner concludesintermittent fasting has been gaining popularity among people looking to shed extra kilograms and maintain a healthy weight researchers argue that this type of diet may also slow down aging and disease intermittent fasting can help with weight management but might it also bring other health benefits in intermittent fasting what essentially takes place in the body is that one source of energy which can facilitate the accumulation of body fat is switched for another our bodies run on glucose or simple sugar but when we fast for a longer period of time that energy source becomes unavailable our system needs to identify a different kind of `` fuel '' that is when the body begins to convert certain types of body fat into fatty acids which are easily absorbed by the blood fatty acids in turn produce molecules called ketones which the body uses as its new source of energy stephen anton a researcher at the university of florida college of medicine in gainesville calls this process `` flipping the metabolic switch '' '' this switch '' explains anton `` can happen after a certain period of time fasting its a gradation in which your metabolism over time shifts to use higher and higher amounts of ketones for energy '' he and his team were interested to learn more about how this switch occurs and whether it could bring other health benefits alongside weight management for this purpose they reviewed numerous recent studies focused on the mechanisms and benefits of intermittent fasting the teams review published in the journal obesity suggests that intermittent fasting may be more healthful than other dieting strategies as ketones put less stress on cells than the byproducts of other dieting styles significant weight loss regardless of style anton and his colleagues explain that the switch usually begins to take place after 8–12 hours of fasting though in the case of individuals who practice intermittent fasting the fasting strategies vary the researchers focused on the two most common types of intermittent fasting diets the first of which is based on time restrictions for eating in it the dieter may fast for a number of hours per day for instance 16 hours while allowing themselves to eat anything theyd like over the remaining hours how intermittent fasting can increase weight loss how does intermittent fasting work read now for the second type of intermittent fasting dieters may choose to alternate days of total fasting with days when no food is off limits or they may simply alternate days of frugal eating when individuals limit themselves to foods that equal only about 500 calories in all with days of unrestricted eating or `` feasting days '' `` of course '' anton notes `` we recommend healthy food during the feasting times '' the teams review of existing studies revealed that all in all any type of intermittent fasting diets are associated with significant weight loss in all 10 clinical trials assessing the effects of alternateday fasting the results conclusively pointed to this strategys effectiveness when it came to shedding extra kilos and 3 out of the 4 studies focused on the restricted timing type of intermittent fasting had similar results '' so in my mind its not a question of whether it works for producing fat loss '' says anton whats more interesting and more important is what kind of tissue is lost through intermittent fasting additional potential health benefits most of the studies reviewed by anton and team revealed that while participants did lose body fat no significant amount of lean tissue which includes organ tissue muscular tissue and bone tissue was lost this is important since lean tissue allows our bodies to keep on functioning well and other types of dieting strategies anton notes lead to significant loss of both fat and lean tissue which may affect health in the long run studies into the effect of the switch from glucosedriven energy to ketonedriven energy in rodents and other animals suggests that intermittent fasting could also have other health benefits the scientists say the researchers say that it could help to prolong the lifespan improve the functioning of metabolic processes protect cognitive function enhance physical performance reduce harmful instances of inflammation and shield against cardiovascular diseases '' an important takeaway is that we all have the ability to switch our metabolism from glucose to ketone utilization and that switch has the potential to have profound health benefits for us in addition to the positive changes in body composition '' stephen anton still the authors warn against starting intermittent fasting without first asking for a doctors advice this dieting style may not be equally beneficial for everyone and in some cases it could do more harm than good he cautionsemerging evidence suggests that a `` potent '' drug could prevent the development of alzheimers disease but only if a person takes the medication long before symptoms of this condition make an appearance an existing drug may be able to stop alzheimers onset researchers say alzheimers disease is the most common form of dementia according to the centers for disease control and prevention cdc an estimated 57 million adults in the united states live with this condition unfortunately there is no cure for alzheimers and following disease onset symptoms tend to worsen progressively then the question `` can specialists prevent the disease in people deemed at increased risk '' arises the authors of a new study from the university of virginia in charlottesville suggest that one drug called memantine which is currently used to manage alzheimers symptoms may actually help prevent the disease this however might only happen if a person takes the drug before symptoms set in '' based on what weve learned so far it is my opinion that we will never be able to cure alzheimers disease by treating patients once they become symptomatic '' says prof george bloom of the university of virginia who oversaw the study '' the best hope for conquering this disease is to first recognize patients who are at risk and begin treating them prophylactically with new drugs and perhaps lifestyle adjustments that would reduce the rate at which the silent phase of the disease progresses '' he says adding `` ideally we would prevent it from starting in the first place '' the journal alzheimers dementia has now published the teams findings the cell cycle reentry process the researchers explain that alzheimers disease actually begins long before symptoms start to show perhaps even a decade or longer in advance one of the conditions characteristics is that once affected by the disease brain cells attempt to divide possibly in order to balance out the death of other neurons only to die anyway in any case the further division of fully formed brain cells is unusual and does not happen in a healthy brain the affected neurons attempt at division is called the `` cell cycle reentry process '' '' its been estimated that as much as 90 percent of neuron death that occurs in the alzheimers brain follows this cell cycle reentry process which is an abnormal attempt to divide '' explains prof bloom more potent alzheimers therapy is on its way recent advances in alzheimers research are speeding up the process of designing better therapies read now '' by the end of the course of the disease the patient will have lost about 30 percent of the neurons in the frontal lobes of the brain '' he estimates study coauthor erin kodis prof blooms former doctoral student formed her own hypothesis about what triggers this mechanism excess calcium she believes enters neurons through special receptors called nmda receptors on the cells surface this drives brain cells to start dividing following a series of laboratory experiments kodis confirmed that her hypothesis was correct this mechanism is set in motion before the formation of amyloid plaques which are characteristic of alzheimers disease in the brain eventually however molecules of an amino acid called beta amyloid stick together to form toxic amyloid plaques memantine may have potent properties kodis saw that when neurons encounter beta amyloid molecules in the early stages that precede plaque buildup nmda receptors open to receive the excess calcium that ultimately leads to their destruction but then the researcher made another discovery the drug memantine prevented cell cycle reentry by closing the nmda receptors on the surface of neurons '' the experiments suggest that memantine might have potent diseasemodifying properties if it could be administered to patients long before they have become symptomatic and diagnosed with alzheimers disease '' prof george bloom '' perhaps this could prevent the disease or slow its progression long enough that the average age of symptom onset could be significantly later if it happens at all '' prof bloom adds these findings are particularly promising memantine has few known side effects and those that have been reported are rare and do not have a major impact on an individuals wellbeing prof bloom believes that in the future a useful preventive approach might be to screen people for telling signs that they are exposed to alzheimers as early as possible specialists could then prescribe memantine to those at an increased risk of the disease he says people may have to take the drug throughout their lives to keep alzheimers at bay or at least in check '' i dont want to raise false hopes '' says prof bloom however he continues `` if this idea of using memantine as a prophylactic pans out it will be because we now understand that calcium is one of the agents that gets the disease started and we may be able to stop or slow the process if done very early '' currently prof bloom and colleagues are planning a clinical trial to test the preventive strategy that they outlined in the studyfor many cancers diagnosis is a long and challenging process a new blood test however could offer a muchneeded simpler and more effective diagnostic technique called cancerseek it has the potential to identify eight cancer types from one blood sample researchers have created a blood test that could detect eight cancer types in the new study researchers reveal how the blood test demonstrated high sensitivity and specificity for cancer detection in more than 1000 people with the disease the team from the johns hopkins university school of medicine in baltimore md recently published their results in the journal science worldwide cancer remains one of the leading causes of death it is estimated that by 2030 the number of cancer deaths will have risen from 8 million to 13 million early diagnosis is key to reducing cancerrelated deaths the earlier the disease is diagnosed the higher the chances of treatment success but sadly many cancers are not caught until the later stages and this is largely due to a lack of fast and effective diagnostic tools however the johns hopkins researchers believe that cancerseek could bring us closer to a quick simple way to detect cancer in its early stages test produced high sensitivity and specificity when cancerous tumors form they release small fragments of mutated dna and proteins into the bloodstream and these can act as markers for cancer the new blood test works by identifying the markers for 16 gene mutations and eight proteins that are associated with eight different cancer types these include breast lung and colorectal cancer as well as five cancers ovarian liver stomach pancreatic and esophageal for which there are currently no routine screening tests for people at average risk '' a novelty of our classification method is that it combines the probability of observing various dna mutations together with the levels of several proteins in order to make the final call '' explains study coauthor cristian tomasetti phd an associate professor of oncology and biostatistics at johns hopkins university how gum disease could lead to cancer researchers shed light on how gum disease can fuel cancer read now for their study the researchers tested cancerseek on 1005 individuals who had been diagnosed with nonmetastatic forms of one of the eight cancers they found that the test was able to identify 70 percent of the cancers with sensitivity ranging from 33 percent for breast cancer to 98 percent for ovarian cancer sensitivity ranged from 69 percent to 98 percent for the five cancers that currently have no routine screening tests the researchers report in terms of specificity the test yielded an overall result of more than 99 percent on testing cancerseek on 812 healthy adults it only produced seven falsepositive results as study coauthor kenneth kinzler phd codirector of the ludwig center for cancer genetics and therapeutics at johns hopkins notes `` very high specificity was essential because falsepositive results can subject patients to unnecessary invasive followup tests and procedures to confirm the presence of cancer '' what is more the researchers found that their test was able to pinpoint the location of tumors for 83 percent of patients test could substantially impact patients the researchers note that larger studies will now be needed to further determine the efficacy of cancerseek as a routine screening test for cancer and such studies are in the pipeline however the team believes that the results of its current research are encouraging '' this has the potential to substantially impact patients earlier detection provides many ways to improve outcomes for patients '' says study coauthor dr anne marie lennon phd who is an associate professor of medicine surgery and radiology at johns hopkins '' optimally cancers would be detected early enough that they could be cured by surgery alone but even cancers that are not curable by surgery alone will respond better to systemic therapies when there is less advanced disease '' she adds the team hopes that cancerseek will one day offer a simple noninvasive and fast strategy for diagnosing cancer in its early stages '' this test represents the next step in changing the focus of cancer research from late stage disease to early disease which i believe will be critical to reducing cancer deaths in the longterm '' study coauthor dr bert vogelstein johns hopkins university school of medicinethey are usually marketed as a safe alternative to conventional cigarettes but a new study suggests that ecigarettes may still pose serious harm to health researchers suggest that ecigarettes may increase the risk of cancer and heart disease researchers at the new york university school of medicine in new york city found that mice exposed to electronic cigaratte ecigarette vapor experienced dna damage in the lungs bladder and heart which could increase the risk of cancer and heart disease such damage was also found in cultured human lung and bladder cells that had been exposed to ecigarette vapor for the equivalent of 10 years study coauthor moonshong tang of the department of environmental medicine at the new york university school of medicine and his colleagues recently reported their findings in the proceedings of the national academy of sciences ecigarettes also known as ecigs have soared in popularity in recent years particularly among teenagers and young adults according to the centers for disease control and prevention cdc more than 2 million middle and high school students in the united states report having used ecigarettes in the past 30 days ecigarettes are not approved by the food and drug administration fda as a quitsmoking aid after the us preventive services task force concluded that there is `` insufficient evidence to recommend for or against their use for smoking cessation '' however research has found that more than 80 percent of smokers believe that ecigarettes could help them to quit while more than 97 percent believe that the batterypowered devices can help to reduce the use of conventional tobacco the debate over ecigarette safety when it comes to our health the cdc believe that ecigarettes are not as harmful as conventional ones still because ecigarettes are relatively new to the market precisely how harmful they are remains unclear that said we are learning more and more about the potential dangers of ecigarette use or `` vaping '' the pros and cons of ecigarettes revealed a new report details the potential benefits and risks of ecigarette use read now in 2017 medical news today reported on a study that linked the flavorings in ecigarette liquid to impaired heart muscle function a more recent report claims that there is `` substantial evidence '' that ecigarette use increases heart rate and that some chemicals in the vapor can harm dna the study by tang and team provides further evidence of the harms of ecigarettes after finding that exposure to ecigarette vapor can damage dna in a way that could cause cancer and heart disease ecigarette vapor caused dna damage the researchers came to their findings by exposing 10 male mice to ecigarette vapor containing 10 milligrams of nicotine which is comparable with what humans inhale for 3 hours per day 5 days per week for 12 weeks when compared with a control group of mice that inhaled filtered air they found that the mice exposed to ecigarette vapor showed dna damage in their heart lungs and bladder what is more the scientists found that exposure to ecigarette vapor halted dna repair processes in the lung tissue of mice they found the same outcomes when testing longterm exposure to ecigarette vapor on human lung and bladder cells in conclusion to their findings tang and colleagues write '' based on these results we propose that ecs ecigarette smoke is carcinogenic and that ecig smokers have a higher risk than nonsmokers to develop lung and bladder cancer and heart diseases '' critics of the research however claim that this study does not prove that ecigarettes are harmful to health talking to the guardian peter hajek the director of the tobacco dependence research unit at queen mary university of london in the united kingdom says that the `` study shows nothing at all about the dangers of vaping '' he continues saying `` it doesnt show that vaping causes cancer this is one in a long line of false alarms which may be putting people off the switch from smoking to vaping which would undoubtedly be of great benefit to them '' it seems that the jury is out on whether or not vaping can cause cancer and heart disease but one thing is clear more studies are needed to find outbreaking research concludes that the use of two existing drugs could successfully treat certain lung cancers the study delves deep into the molecular survival kit of lung tumors understanding how lung tumors survive and grow leads to an innovative new treatment lung cancer is now the leading cause of cancer death in the united states responsible for almost 160000 deaths each year many are driven by the kras oncogene kras is an essential gene but in its mutant form it is an important step in the generation of many types of cancer for over 30 years the kras oncogene has been a focus of research finding a way to remove its teeth would be pivotal in the treatment of a range of cancers as part of this effort rather than targeting the gene directly some scientists have focused on pathways that are related to the errant gene one pathway of interest centers on insulin and insulinlike growth factor1 igf1 this pathway helps to regulate the uptake of nutrients into the cell providing it with the energy and raw ingredients it needs to grow if the tumor cells fuel supply could be severed its onward march might be halted however it is not clear whether kras oncogenes are reliant on this particular pathway and in clinical trials results have not been encouraging in fact one study in mice found that lung tumors actually became more aggressive after the pathway was suppressed attacking krasrelated pathways undeterred a team from the boston childrens hospital in massachusetts used a fresh approach in the mouse study mentioned above the insulinigf1 signaling pathway was only partially closed off in the latest study though a genetic technique was used that shut it down entirely to do this the scientists crossed two strains of genetically modified mice the first is a wellused model for krasdriven lung cancer and the other is a mouse used to study diabetes that lacks insulinigf1 signaling in the diabetes mouse model the insulinigf1 pathway is unshackled by the deletion of two genes irs1 and irs2 these encode `` adaptor '' proteins which are essential for the smooth running of the insulinigf1 pathway '' our study uses a robust way to block insulinigf1 signaling and addresses a longstanding question in krasmutant lung cancer when you use genetics results can be more conclusive '' senior study author nada kalaany phd an assistant professor at harvard medical school boston ma using their new model the scientists demonstrated that by suppressing the two adaptor proteins insulinigf1 signaling is blocked and lung tumors are significantly suppressed '' almost all animals in this lung cancer model typically die within 15 weeks of kras activation '' says kalaany `` but the ones that lost both irs1 and irs2 were completely fine we saw almost no tumors at 10 to 15 weeks '' this finding is important because drugs that block insulinigf1 signaling are already in use and freely available the results are published this week in the proceedings of the national academy of sciences while the preliminary findings are hopeful the researchers knew that there was more work to be done cancer is a complex evermorphing disease with a terrifying knack for circumventing medical interventions outfoxing lung cancer to observe whether the cancer cells were able to navigate around this new roadblock the team let the animals live longer to see what happened next as kalaany explains `` sure enough at around 16 weeks we started seeing some tumors so then we asked how were these tumor cells able to overcome loss of irs1 and irs2 '' how lung cancer cells disguise themselves to evade chemo by adopting the traits of cells from other major organs lung cancer cells can escape chemotherapy read now the answer was found in the levels of essential cellular building blocks amino acids tumor cells lacking the adaptor proteins failed to move amino acids into their cells despite a plentiful supply outside of the cell '' growth factors like igf1 tell cells that nutrients are around '' says kalaany `` so when you suppress their signaling the tumor cells dont take up the amino acids and think they are starved '' '' but we found that the tumor cells can compensate for this and break down their own proteins to generate amino acids '' so the krasdriven tumors threw out a curve ball they had once again figured out a workaround by breaking themselves down in a process known as autophagy they can generate the raw material they need to thrive the researchers however were one step ahead heading cancer off at the pass drugs that inhibit protein breakdown are already available these include chloroquine which is currently involved in a number of cancer drug trials and bortezomib which blocks proteasomes proteindigesting structures and is already used to treat myeloma when the two prongs of the attack were combined the results were more than encouraging they found that tumor cells lacking irs1 and irs2 did not grow well and when the inhibitors were added growth stopped almost completely additional studies will now be needed to understand how these two drug types might interact in a patient however this is a considerable breakthrough and the researchers are excited to take it to the next phase '' our work tries to identify metabolic dependencies and vulnerabilities in tumors '' says kalaany `` if we identify collaborators we would love to have a clinical trial in nonsmallcell lung cancer combining igf1 inhibitors with autophagy inhibitors or proteasome inhibitors '' by testing to breaking point every part of a tumor cells survival kit researchers will one day beat cancerhigh blood pressure or hypertension is a major risk factor for heart disease the leading cause of death in the united states but a new study has found that two classes of medication that are commonly used to lower blood pressure could present a death risk all on their own researchers have identified two blood pressure drugs that could raise mortality risk scientists at the intermountain medical center heart institute in salt lake city ut found that individuals with hypertension who used alpha blockers and alpha2 agonists to control their blood pressure showed an increase in blood pressure variability which could increase mortality risk lead study author dr brian clements and team have recently presented their findings at the 2018 american college of cardiology acc scientific sessions held in orlando fl blood pressure is the force of blood that pushes against the wall of the arteries and in november last year the american heart association aha and the acc set new guidelines now a person is considered to have hypertension if their systolic blood pressure the top number is 130 millimeters of mercury mmhg or higher and their diastolic blood pressure the bottom number is 80 mmhg or higher systolic blood pressure is the force of blood against the artery walls when the heart is beating while diastolic blood pressure is the force of blood when the heart is at rest or between heartbeats the updated guidelines mean that almost half of adults in the united states have high blood pressure which puts them at greater risk of heart attack stroke and heart disease among other health problems of course when it comes to treating hypertension the goal is to lower blood pressure this may be achieved through lifestyle changes such as adopting a healthful diet and increasing physical activity medication or both previous research however has discovered that consistency is key for blood pressure levels a study published in the bmj in 2016 for example associated higher variability of systolic blood pressure with a 15 percent increase in allcause mortality according to the new study from dr clements and colleagues certain types of medication that are used to lower blood pressure may be contributing to this mortality risk two medications should be avoided for their study the researchers analyzed the data of over 10500 adults with high blood pressure the participants had their blood pressure measured at least seven times between january 2007 and december 2011 and the type of blood pressure medication they were using was monitored common blood pressure drug raises skin cancer risk researchers reveal how a blood pressure medication may increase the risk of skin cancer read now the team used these data to assess whether certain classes of blood pressure medication were associated with variability in blood pressure levels the study revealed two classes of blood pressure medication that were linked to higher blood pressure variability in subjects alpha blockers and alpha2 agonists alpha blockers which include doxazosin mesylate and prazosin hydrochloride work by dilating the blood vessels alpha2 agonists such as methyldopa work by targeting sympathetic nervous system activity thereby reducing blood vessel constriction based on the study results dr clements and colleagues say that these two medications should not be used to treat hypertension '' patients should know what their blood pressure is '' he says `` and if its up and down all the time the patient should work with their physician to explore options for the best blood pressure medications that will reduce variances '' '' where possible the two types of medications that show an increase in variances should be avoided '' dr brian clements dr clements adds that ace inhibitors angiotensin receptor blockers calcium channel blockers and thiazide diuretics may be safer treatment options for people with hypertension `` people who are on other types of blood pressure medications have an increased risk of death '' he adds however blood pressure variability is not solely down to medication dr clements notes that the way in which blood pressure is measured can have a significant effect on readings '' because of the variables that affect blood pressure measurements '' says dr clements `` finding ways to more accurately measure blood pressure can better identify effective treatments for patients who have hypertension '' for accurate blood pressure readings he recommends sitting or laying down for 15 minutes before measurements are taken avoiding stressful situations and using a wellfitting blood pressure cuff may also helpa new study reveals that individuals with higher levels of belly fat and larger waistlines are more likely to have lower vitamin d levels where fat is stored on the body may impact vitamin d levels currently in medical circles vitamin d is the talk of the town produced in our skin on contact with sunlight it plays a myriad of roles in the human body in the past few months medical news today have covered a wealth of research into the group of fatsoluble secosteroids more commonly known as vitamin d for instance recent studies have found that vitamin d might protect against heart failure diabetes and cancer and that vitamin d deficiency causes hair loss vitamin d deficiency has traditionally been linked to bone health but it may also have a role to play in respiratory tract infections and autoimmune disease among others with more than 40 percent of the population of the united states being vitamin d deficient this is a serious issue some authors have referred to it as `` an ignored epidemic '' estimating that over 1 billion people worldwide have inadequate levels vitamin d and belly fat exposed they discovered that in women both total and abdominal fat were associated with lower vitamin d levels but that abdominal fat had the greatest impact in men however lower vitamin d levels were significantly linked with fat in the liver and abdomen across both sexes more belly fat predicted lower levels of vitamin d rafiq explains `` the strong relationship between increasing amounts of abdominal fat and lower levels of vitamin d suggests that individuals with larger waistlines are at a greater risk of developing deficiency and should consider having their vitamin d levels checked '' her next step is to understand why this relationship exists does a deficiency in vitamin d cause fat to be stored in the abdominal region or does belly fat decrease levels of vitamin d it will take more work to tease apart cause and effect as rafiq explains `` due to the observational nature of this study we can not draw a conclusion on the direction or cause of the association between obesity and vitamin d levels '' '' however this strong association may point to a possible role for vitamin d in abdominal fat storage and function '' rachida rafiq the links between obesity and vitamin d deficiency are growing increasingly robust the next challenge is working out a way to effectively tackle this issuebaking soda has been used as a home remedy for generations due to its antacid properties yet its benefits run even deeper and new research may explain why it is an effective aid in the treatment of autoimmune diseases such as arthritis how can this kitchen staple change the bodys inflammatory response baking soda also called sodium bicarbonate is a kitchen staple commonly used as a raising agent for cakes that being said it has also made a name for itself as a home remedy for various conditions half a teaspoon of baking soda is often taken to ease heartburn or acid reflux for example and this substance is also used to whiten teeth in a new study whose findings are now published in the journal of immunology researchers from the medical college of georgia at augusta university reveal exactly how drinking a solution of baking soda could prime the immune system against inflammatory diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis paul oconnor a renal physiologist at augusta university and colleagues tested the effects that drinking a baking soda solution would have first on rats and then on humans their experiments tell a complex story about how this salt provides a signal to a special kind of cell called `` mesothelial cells '' telling them that the body is fine and not under attack rendering an aggressive immune system unnecessary thus harmful autoimmune responses are averted baking soda and mesothelial cells mesothelial cells line the internal organs as well as many different cavities in the body not only do they prevent organs and other internal tissue from sticking together they also serve other functions not all of which have been studied in detail in the new study oconnor and team tested the effect that a baking soda solution would have first on rats and then on healthy human participants and they noted that it influenced an intriguing mechanism can this biochemical switch off inflammation researchers may have found a way to `` switch off '' certain immune cells when necessary read now baking soda `` prompts '' the stomach to produce more gastric acid which allows it to digest food quicker and easier but in addition to this it also seems to tell the mesothelial cells that line the spleen to `` take it easy '' because there is no threat basically in oconnor words mesothelial cells learn that `` its most likely a hamburger not a bacterial infection '' so they in turn do not activate the spleens `` army '' of macrophages or white blood cells tasked with clearing up potentially harmful cellular detritus '' certainly drinking bicarbonate affects the spleen and we think its through the mesothelial cells '' oconnor explains mesothelial cells communicate with the organs they line using small projections called microvilli and the medium through which they send their message is the neurotransmitter acetylcholine from inflammatory to antiinflammatory so what actually happens the study authors note that those who drank the baking soda solution experienced a shift in the kinds of immune cells activated in the spleen in fact proinflammatory macrophages m1 dwindled in number while the levels of antiinflammatory cells m2 rose the same kinds of cells are also housed in the blood and kidneys and baking soda happens to be used in the treatment of chronic kidney disease this idea prompted the new studys authors to explore the mechanisms through which this substance might help to improve renal function '' we started thinking how does baking soda slow progression of kidney disease '' says oconnor at first the researchers analyzed the effects of the baking soda solution on a rat model of kidney disease and then again on healthy rats which acted as the control sample this is when the researchers noticed that the levels of m1 cells in the kidneys dropped while those of m2 cells increased both the rats with kidney disease and the healthy rats presented the same development and it was this shift that flagged up the notion that baking soda could influence the inflammatory response at cellular level when the researchers recruited healthy medical students and asked them to drink the baking soda solution it became apparent the antiinflammatory effect of this substance happened in the spleen as well as in the blood '' the shift from inflammatory to an antiinflammatory profile is happening everywhere we saw it in the kidneys we saw it in the spleen now we see it in the peripheral blood '' paul oconnor safe way to treat inflammatory disease one of the authors main revelations was the fact that it was the mesothelial cells that mediated the antiinflammatory signals an existing working theory had been that signals were transmitted to the relevant cells through the vagus nerve a long cranial nerve that communicates with the heart lungs and various organs in the abdomen but experiments revealed that this idea was incorrect when the scientists tried cutting off this nerve this did not affect the behavior of the mesothelial cells instead it became apparent that these cells had a more direct communication with the organs they lined than previously thought oconnor and his team became aware of this when they noted that moving the spleen affected mesothelial cells that lined it and the signals modulating the inflammatory response were lost '' we think the cholinergic acetylcholine signals that we know mediate this antiinflammatory response arent coming directly from the vagal nerve innervating the spleen but from the mesothelial cells that form these connections to the spleen '' explains oconnor the results begin to provide an answer as to why baking soda can help with autoimmune diseases including arthritis and further research into these mechanisms could help to optimize the results obtained through this common compound '' its potentially a really safe way to treat inflammatory disease '' oconnor concludesanxiety disorders are common across the united states thought to affect around 40 million adults each year however as if these feelings of worry and fear arent enough to contend with a new study suggests that older people who have worsening anxiety symptoms may be more likely to develop alzheimers disease researchers have linked increasing anxiety symptoms in older age to higher levels of a protein linked to alzheimers researchers found that increasing symptoms of anxiety were linked to higher levels of betaamyloid which is a protein associated with alzheimers disease in the brains of older people with normal cognitive functioning first study author dr nancy donovan who is a geriatric psychiatrist at brigham and womens hospital in boston ma and team say that the results suggest that a rise in the sypmtoms of anxiety could be an early sign of alzheimers the findings were recently published in the american journal of psychiatry alzheimers disease is a form of dementia characterized by problems with memory and thinking as well as changes in behavior it is estimated that around 55 million people in the us are living with alzheimers of whom around 54 million are over the age of 65 the precise causes of alzheimers disease remain unclear but scientists believe that betaamyloid plays a key role this is a protein that can form `` plaques '' which have been found to block nerve cell communication in the brains of people with alzheimers these plaques are considered to be a hallmark of the disease and research has suggested that an increase in betaamyloid levels can occur up to 10 years before the onset of alzheimers symptoms according to the new study anxiety could play a significant role in increased betaamyloid levels among older adults targeting anxiety may slow alzheimers previous studies have suggested that depression and anxiety might be indicators of alzheimers since symptoms of these mental health conditions often occur in the early stages of the disease for their study dr donovan and colleagues sought to determine whether or not betaamyloid might play a role in this association alzheimers tripleaction diabetes drug shows promise as treatment researchers reveal how a diabetes drug could help to treat alzheimers read now the research included 270 adults between age 62 and 90 with normal cognitive functioning all of whom underwent positron emission tomography at study baseline and annually during 5 years of followup in order to determine levels of betaamyloid in their brains symptoms of anxiety and depression among the adults were assessed using the 30item geriatric depression scale it was found that adults who showed an increase in anxiety symptoms over 5 years of followup also had higher levels of betaamyloid in their brains the researchers say that this indicates that worsening anxiety might be an early sign of alzheimers disease '' if further research substantiates anxiety as an early indicator it would be important for not only identifying people early on with the disease but also treating it and potentially slowing or preventing the disease process early on '' dr nancy donovan the scientists point out that followup studies are required to determine whether older adults who experience an increase in anxiety symptoms actually go on to develop alzheimersnew results could change the face of alzheimers treatment the herpes simplex virus is found to play a vital role in the condition and antiherpetic medication is shown to have a dramatic effect on dementia risk alzheimers disease may soon be treated with antiviral medication last month medical news today reported on a study that found `` strong evidence '' that viruses are involved in alzheimers disease the postmortem analyses of brain tissue found that people who lived with this dementia type also had more herpesviruses 6 and 7 than people without alzheimers now a scientific commentary suggests that the study that mnt covered is not the only one to pinpoint a link between herpes and dementia in fact three more studies have strengthened this link and the commentary recently published in the journal of alzheimers disease – takes a look at all three ruth itzhaki who is a professor of neuroscience and experimental psychology at the university of manchester in the united kingdom alongside richard lathe who is a professor in the division of infection and pathway medicine at the university of edinburgh also in the uk authored the commentary remarkable magnitude of antiviral effect the studies referenced in the commentary are two articles tsai et al 2017 and chen et al 2018 that suggest that acute herpes zoster infection puts people at a higher risk of dementia and one article that shows that aggressive treatment with antiherpetic medication drastically lowers dementia risk the latter study deemed `` most important '' by profs itzhaki and lathe examined 8362 people aged 50 and above who received a diagnosis of herpes simplex virus hsv infection as well as a control group of 25086 agematched healthy people breakthrough researchers fix alzheimers gene by correcting the faulty apoe4 gene researchers were able to erase its damaging effects on the brain read now the two groups were followed for almost a decade between 2001 and 2010 in the herpes group the risk of dementia was over 25 times higher than in the control group significantly the study also revealed that aggressive antiviral treatment reduced the relative risk of dementia by 10 times prof lathe comments on these new findings saying `` not only is the magnitude of the antiviral effect remarkable but also the fact that despite the relatively brief duration and the timing of treatment in most patients severely affected by hsv1 it appeared to prevent the longterm damage in the brain that results in alzheimers '' '' this article and two others provide the first population evidence for a causal link between herpes virus infection and alzheimers disease a hugely important finding '' prof ruth itzhaki '' i believe we are the first to realize the implications of these striking data on this devastating condition which principally affects the elderly '' prof itzhaki adds '' but '' she says `` we believe that these safe and easily available antivirals may have a strong part to play in combating the disease in these patients '' she also suggests that in the future it may be possible to prevent the disease `` by vaccination against the virus in infancy '' '' successful treatment by a specific drug or successful vaccination against the putative microbe are the only ways to prove that a microbe is the cause of a noninfectious human disease '' says prof itzhakiwith marijuana legalization on the rise an increasing number of studies are exploring the drugs potential harms and benefits however a new study suggests that when it comes to brain health alcohol is more damaging researchers say that alcohol causes more damage to the brain than marijuana does scientists at the university of colorado boulder conducted a review of existing imaging data that looked at the effects of alcohol and marijuana or cannabis on the brain their findings linked alcohol consumption with longterm changes to the structure of white matter and gray matter in the brain the use of marijuana however seemed to have no significant longterm effects on brain structure study leader rachel thayer of the department of psychology and neuroscience at the university of colorado boulder and colleagues recently reported their results in the journal addiction it is estimated that around 222 million people in the united states have used marijuana in the past month making it `` the most commonly used illicit drug '' in the country across the us however it is increasingly becoming legalized for both medicinal and recreational purposes as a result of this changing legislation researchers have been trying to find out more about how marijuana may benefit health as well as the damage that it could cause last year for example medical news today reported on a study linking marijuana use to a greater risk of psychosis in teenagers while another study claimed that the drug is `` worse than cigarettes '' for cardiovascular health on the other side of the coin researchers have found that cannabinoids which are the active compounds in marijuana could help to prevent migraine and a more recent study linked marijuana use to an increased sex drive marijuana vs alcohol which is worse for this latest study thayer and colleagues sought to learn more about how marijuana use affects the brain study coauthor kent hutchison also of the department of psychology and neuroscience notes that to date studies that have investigated this association have produced mixed results '' when you look at these studies going back years '' he explains `` you see that one study will report that marijuana use is related to a reduction in the volume of the hippocampus the next study then comes around and they say that marijuana use is related to changes in the cerebellum `` teen marijuana use may lead to bipolar symptoms later on researchers have linked marijuana use in adolescence to a greater risk of bipolar symptoms read now '' the point is that theres no consistency across all of these studies in terms of the actual brain structures '' with the aim of closing the gap on this inconsistency the researchers conducted a new analysis on existing brain imaging data they looked at how marijuana use affects white matter and gray matter in the brain and how its effects compare with another `` drug '' that we have become so accustomed to alcohol gray matter is the tissue on the brains surface that primarily consists of nerve cell bodies white matter is the deeper brain tissue that contains myelinated nerve fibers which are branches protruding from nerve cells that transmit electrical impulses to other cells and tissues the team notes that any reduction in the size of white or gray matter or a loss in their integrity can lead to impairments in brain functioning '' with alcohol weve known its bad for the brain for decades '' notes hutchison `` but for cannabis we know so little '' marijuana use had no impact the study included the brain images of 853 adults who were aged between 18 and 55 years and 439 teenagers between the ages of 14 and 18 all participants varied in their use of alcohol and marijuana the researchers found that alcohol use particularly in adults who had been drinking for many years was associated with a reduction in gray matter volume as well as a reduction in the integrity of white matter marijuana use however appeared to have no impact on the structure of gray or white matter in either teenagers or adults based on these findings the researchers believe that drinking alcohol is likely to be much more harmful to brain health than using marijuana '' while marijuana may also have some negative consequences it definitely is nowhere near the negative consequences of alcohol '' kent hutchison when it comes to the possible benefits of marijuana use however thayer and her team note that the jury is still out and further research is needed to reach some conclusionsa form of intermittent fasting known as the 168 diet helps obese individuals to lose weight and lower their blood pressure according to a new study timerestricted eating may be the key to weight loss more and more people now turn to intermittent fasting as a fast and effective way to lose weight there are different form of this diet depending on the time intervals of `` fasting '' and `` feasting '' the socalled 52 diet for instance consists of eating normally for 5 days every week and fasting for 2 days in the fasting days the dieter restricts their calorie intake to 500 or 600 per day in daily fasting or the 168 diet people eat whatever they like for 8 hours and fast for the remaining 16 a new study evaluates the benefits of this 168 pattern for obese individuals and finds that not only does the diet work but also that it helps to lower blood pressure as many as 933 million adults have obesity in the united states according to the latest data from the centers for disease control and prevention cdc thats almost 40 percent of the countrys entire population this research was led by corresponding author krista varady an associate professor of kinesiology and nutrition at the university of illinois at chicago and the findings were published in the journal nutrition and healthy aging losing weight without counting calories varady and colleagues recruited 23 obese study participants who were aged 45 years on average with an average body mass index bmi of 35 between 10 am and 6 pm the participants could eat whatever and however much they liked but they were only allowed to drink water and caloriefree drinks for the remaining 16 hours intermittent fasting may have profound health benefits some researchers say that this type of diet can also slow down aging and stave off disease read now all the study participants were followed for a period of 12 weeks and their dieting outcomes were compared with those of a previous weight loss trial of another type of intermittent fasting called `` alternate day fasting '' in alternate day fasting they can eat whatever they like for one day and fast for the following day on average when compared with the control trial those on the 168 diet consumed 350 fewer calories lost 3 percent of their weight and had lower blood pressure more specifically the systolic blood pressure of those who fasted daily dropped by an average of 7 millimeters of mercury however insulin resistance cholesterol and fat mass remained the same between the two compared groups as varady and her colleagues conclude `` these preliminary data offer promise for the use of timerestricted feeding as a weight loss technique in obese adults but longerterm largescale randomized controlled trials are required '' the studys corresponding author also comments on the significance of the findings saying `` the results we saw in this study are similar to the results weve seen in other studies on alternate day fasting '' '' but '' she adds `` one of the benefits of the 168 diet may be that it is easier for people to maintain we observed that fewer participants dropped out of this study when compared to studies on other fasting diets '' '' the takehome message from this study is that there are options for weight loss that do not include calorie counting or eliminating certain foods '' krista varady '' the 168 diet is another tool for weight loss that we now have preliminary scientific evidence to support '' varady concludes `` when it comes to weight loss people need to find what works for them because even small amounts of success can lead to improvements in metabolic health ''fish oil is hailed for its plentiful health benefits but new research suggests that the longterm consumption of fish oil or sunflower oil may increase the risk of fatty liver disease later in life researchers say that lifelong intake of fish oil or sunflower oil could raise the risk of fatty liver disease in later life by studying rats researchers found that lifelong intake of sunflower oil or fish oil led to changes in the liver that make the organ vulnerable to nonalcoholic steatohepatitis nash nash is a more serious form of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease nafld study coauthor josé luis quiles a professor of physiology working at the university of granada in spain and colleagues recently reported their findings in the journal of nutritional biochemistry it is estimated that around 20 percent of people in the united states who have nafld also have nash and the condition becomes more common with age nash is characterized by a buildup of fat in the liver which is not caused by alcohol consumption inflammation and liver cell damage the liver damage that occurs in nash can increase the risk of liver cirrhosis and liver cancer some of the key risk factors for nash include overweight and obesity high blood pressure high cholesterol and type 2 diabetes which are factors heavily influenced by diet studying how dietary fats affect the liver building on the link between diet and nash the new study from prof quiles and his colleagues suggests that the type of oils we consume could play a role in our laterlife risk of the condition the researchers came to their findings by analyzing the effects of different dietary fats including sunflower oil fish oil and virgin olive oil on rat livers in detail the team looked at how lifelong intake of each of these oils impacted the structure of the rodents livers as well as their effects on gene expression liver fibrosis or scarring oxidative stress and the length of telomeres kiwi compound may prevent nonalcoholic fatty liver disease research suggests that nafld could be prevented with a compound found in kiwi read now oxidative stress is defined as an imbalance between free radicals which are molecules that can damage cells and the bodys ability to `` deoxidize '' these molecules and prevent their harmful effects telomeres are `` caps '' at the end of each strand of dna and they protect our chromosomes the shorter our telomeres the greater the damage to our cells research has shown that a reduction in telomere length plays a key role in cellular aging and agerelated disease telomeres that are too long however can increase the risk of cancer additionally the team looked at how the liver evolves with age as a result of the different dietary fats consumed olive oil best for a healthy liver the researchers not only found that liver fat accumulates with age but they also revealed that the type of fat that builds up on the liver is influenced by the type of fats that we eat as prof quiles points out `` this means that regardless of this accumulation some livers age in a healthier way than others and with a greater or lesser predisposition to certain diseases '' the study revealed that fish oil and sunflower oil negatively impacted the liver health of the rats lifelong sunflower oil intake was found to trigger liver fibrosis and it also altered the structure of the organ led to changes in gene expression and increased oxidation in liver cells rats that had a lifelong intake of fish oil demonstrated an increase in agerelated cell oxidation in their livers the team reports and they also experienced a decrease in electron transport chain activity in the mitochondria the `` powerhouses '' of the cell which impairs cell function fish oil also led to an increase in relative telomere length in the liver the researchers report olive oil however was found to cause the least damage to the liver taken together the team says these findings indicate that virgin olive oil might be the best dietary fat for laterlife liver health '' the alterations caused by the longterm consumption of sunflower and fish oils make the liver susceptible to nonalcoholic steatohepatitis a very serious disease that may act as a catalyst for other liver diseases such as cirrhosis and liver cancer we believe that this study will be very useful in preventing and treating diverse liver diseases '' prof josé luis quiles '' virgin olive oil is the healthiest option '' he adds `` which has already been proven in relation to diverse aspects of health '' these findings may come as a surprise fish oil is the most commonly used natural product in the us due to its frequently documented health benefits still this latest study certainly provides some food for thought when it comes to choosing which fats to include in the dietpopular belief has it and even some governmental authorities on nutrition agree that we should avoid fullfat dairy products due to their high content of saturated fats but a new study boldly challenges these claims fullfat dairy products may actually be good for cardiovascular health wholefat dairy does not raise cardiovascular risk conversely some fats present in certain dairy products might even keep stroke and heart disease at bay this is the main takeaway of a recent study led by dr dariush mozaffarian from the friedman school of nutrition science and policy at tufts university in boston ma with their findings dr mozaffarian and team challenge not only popular opinions but also the stance of governmental organizations such as the united states department of agriculture usda and the us department of health human services the two bodies advise people to avoid fullfat dairy due to its impact on cholesterol levels the saturated fats found in wholefat dairy products warn the usda raise levels of lowdensity lipoprotein ldl cholesterol also known as the `` bad '' kind of cholesterol in time high ldl cholesterol may lead to cardiovascular conditions such as atherosclerosis or coronary artery disease however the new study turns the idea that fullfat dairy is bad for you on its head the surprising findings were published in the american journal of clinical nutrition marcia otto who is an assistant professor in the department of epidemiology human genetics and environmental sciences at the university of texas health science center at houston is the first and corresponding author of the paper dairy fat may prevent heart disease stroke to study the effect of dairy on mortality risk and cardiovascular health dr mozaffarian and team examined over 2900 us seniors aged 65 and above the researchers measured the participants blood plasma levels of three fatty acids contained by dairy products at the beginning of the study in 1992 6 years later and then 13 years later associations with `` total mortality causespecific mortality and cardiovascular disease cvd risk '' were examined these four foods are proven to lower your cholesterol the `` portfolio diet '' has been proved to keep the heart healthy by several studies read now during the 22year followup period 2428 of the participants died of these deaths 833 were due to heart disease however none of the three fatty acids examined correlated with the risk of total mortality in fact high circulating levels of heptadecanoic fatty acid were associated with a lower risk of death from heart disease also adults with higher levels of fatty acids overall were 42 percent less likely to die from stroke revealed the analysis dietary guidelines should be revised according to the studys corresponding author the findings suggest that current dietary guidelines need to be amended the 2015–2020 dietary guidelines for americans issued by the office of disease prevention and health promotion recommend the consumption of `` fatfree and lowfat 1 percent dairy including milk yogurt cheese or fortified soy beverages commonly known as soymilk '' however otto disagrees `` consistent with previous findings '' she says `` our results highlight the need to revisit current dietary guidance on whole fat dairy foods which are rich sources of nutrients such as calcium and potassium '' '' these are essential for health not only during childhood but throughout life particularly also in later years when undernourishment and conditions like osteoporosis are more common '' adds the researcher '' dairy fat contrary to popular belief does not increase the risk of heart disease or overall mortality in older adults in addition the results suggest that one fatty acid present in dairy may lower risk of death from cardiovascular disease particularly from stroke '' marcia otto she adds `` consumers have been exposed to so much different and conflicting information about diet particularly in relation to fats '' and she highlights the fact that `` a growing body of evidence '' suggests that dairy fat is actually good for you '' its important to have robust studies so people can make more balanced and informed choices based on scientific fact rather than hearsay '' otto concludesa new study looking at blood stem cells uncovered fresh details surrounding the mechanisms by which alcohol raises the risk of developing cancer a new study unearths the details of cancers relationship with alcohol alcohol is known to raise the risk of no fewer than seven types of cancer these are mouth upper throat pharynx voice box laryngeal esophageal breast liver and bowel cancer though the links are established exactly how alcohol works to induce malignancy is not as wellunderstood several mechanisms are thought to be at work most previous studies have only examined cells in the laboratory looking at changes in them after exposure to alcohol ethanol recently researchers from mrc laboratory of molecular biology in cambridge united kingdom set out to gain a clearer picture of the alcoholcancer relationship using whole animals their study which was funded by cancer research uk is published this week in the journal nature acetaldehyde and blood stem cells the team fed diluted ethanol to mice and then used chromosome analysis and dna sequencing to measure any damage caused by acetaldehyde a chemical produced when alcohol is processed they focused their attention on a specific cell type blood stem cells blood stem cells found in blood and bone marrow are immature blood cells that can develop into any type of blood cell including white blood cells platelets and red blood cells it is important to understand how alcohol damages these cells as faulty stem cells are known to cause cancer as alcohol is broken down in the gut bacteria convert it into large quantities of acetaldehyde a chemical that has previously been shown to cause cancer in animals even light drinkers at risk of cancer a recent statement from the american society of clinical oncology outlines the dangers of alcohol read now following the analysis the researchers found that acetaldehyde could in fact damage and break dna within blood stem cells chromosomes became rearranged and the dna sequence was permanently changed in stem cells lead study author prof ketan patel says `` some cancers develop due to dna damage in stem cells while some damage occurs by chance our findings suggest that drinking alcohol can increase the risk of this damage '' selfdefense mechanisms alongside new insights into the damage that ethanol causes to stem cells the scientists uncovered new information about the protective mechanisms employed by our bodies in response to alcohol enzymes called aldehyde dehydrogenases aldhs form the first line of defense against alcoholrelated damage aldhs break alcohol down into acetate `` which our cells can use as a source of energy '' millions of people many east asians for instance have low levels of aldh or faulty copies of the enzymes this means that toxic acetaldehyde builds up in the body these individuals will experience telltale flushed cheeks and potentially feel ill when the researchers investigated mice without aldh they found that alcohol caused four times as much damage to dna when compared with mice that could produce aldh beyond aldh the body has a range of other secondary mechanisms that can repair various types of dna damage but these mechanisms do not always work some people have mutations that render them ineffective '' our study highlights that not being able to process alcohol effectively can lead to an even higher risk of alcoholrelated dna damage and therefore certain cancers '' prof ketan patel '' but '' he continues `` its important to remember that alcohol clearance and dna repair systems are not perfect and alcohol can still cause cancer in different ways even in people whose defense mechanisms are intact '' alcohol is known to give rise to cancer and studies such as this help us to understand why and will eventually help to prevent or slow alcoholrelated cancers as prof linda bauld from cancer research uk says `` this thoughtprovoking research highlights the damage alcohol can do to our cells costing some people more than just a hangover ''it was previously believed that fructose which is the sugar found in fruit and fruit juice is processed by the liver however a new study suggests that fructose is mainly processed in the small intestine researchers reveal that fructose is primarily processed in the small intestine not the liver the study which is published in the journal cell metabolism reveals that processed highsugar food and drink only spills over into the liver for processing when the small intestine becomes overwhelmed the recent findings add to the body of scientific knowledge on the effects of too much fructose on the body we know from previous research that excessive consumption of sugar is harmful to the liver and that chronic overconsumption causes obesity increases resistance to insulin and creates conditions for the onset of diabetes last year medical news today reported on a study that found that fructosecontaining products such as sweetened drinks can increase the risk of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis a form of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease `` which can lead to cirrhosis or liver cancer '' study observed fructose digestion in mice the researchers from princeton university in new jersey used mice to study how fructose travels through the digestive system their findings suggest that there is a physiological difference in how the body processes different amounts of sugar rather than the liver processing all the sugar in the body the team observed that more than 90 percent of fructose was processed in the small intestines of the mice in the study the team found that fructose not absorbed into the small intestine is passed through to the colon where it comes into contact with the microbiome which is the microbiotic flora that inhabits the large intestine and colon fruit juices and smoothies have unacceptably high sugar content researchers reveal that a childs entire daily sugar allowance could be in one serving of fruit juice read now the researchers explain that the microbiome is not designed to process sugar so while a person could eat a large amount of carbohydrates without exposing their microbiome to any sugar this changes significantly when highsugar products such as soda and juice are consumed while the findings do not prove that fructose influences the microbiome the team believes that `` an effect is likely '' they suggest that this link should be further investigated in future studies as it may provide new insights into the adverse effects of high sugar intake eat sugar only after meals in the study the small intestine was found to clear fructose more efficiently after a meal the team theorizes that during periods of fasting such as in the morning or midafternoon individuals may be more vulnerable to fructose as the small intestine has reduced ability to process it during these times as study author joshua d rabinowitz of the lewissigler institute for integrative genomics at princeton university explains `` we can offer some reassurance at least from these animal studies that fructose from moderate amounts of fruits will not reach the liver '' '' we saw that feeding of the mice prior to the sugar exposure enhanced the small intestines ability to process fructose '' rabinowitz continues `` and that protected the liver and the microbiome from sugar exposure '' rabinowitz says that the results support `` the most oldfashioned advice in the world '' which is to `` limit sweets to moderate quantities after meals '' and avoid sugary drinks outside of meal timesit is known that being overweight or obese leads to poor health but it may be less known that abdominal fat is the most harmful type until now researchers were unsure of the mechanisms responsible for this but now they reveal how an enzyme produced by our liver raises the risk of diabetes inflammation in the fat around the belly is particularly harmful and new research reveals why when it comes to the harmful consequences of excess fat the way it is distributed across the body is key medical news today have recently reported on studies showing that abdominal fat is deeply tied to type 2 diabetes and heart disease we have also covered studies suggesting that women in particular could be at an increased cardiometabolic risk if they have a higher waisttohip ratio additional research has found that belly fat is particularly dangerous when inflamed older studies have shown that local inflammation in the adipose tissue leads to cardiometabolic abnormalities such as insulin resistance but the exact mechanism responsible for this connection between adipose tissue inflammation and cardiometabolic disorders has remained somewhat unclear for instance researchers have wondered whether the inflammation is `` a cause or a consequence of insulin resistance '' now researchers at columbia university irving medical center in new york city ny help to shed some muchneeded light on the issue they reveal that the liver contributes to this inflammation the team was led by dr ira tabas who is the richard j stock professor of medicine at columbia university vagelos college of physicians and surgeons and the findings were published in the journal nature the key role of dpp4 inhibitors in diabetes dr tabas and his colleagues used obese mice to test whether blocking an enzyme called dpp4 would lower the inflammation in their abdominal fat the researchers focused on dpp4 because humans who already have diabetes are prescribed dpp4 inhibitors to help them manage their symptoms dpp4 inhibitors work by preventing the enzyme from interacting with an insulinboosting hormone lowcalorie sweeteners may promote metabolic syndrome people with metabolic syndrome are much more likely to develop diabetes to prevent it new research suggests that these people should avoid artificial sweeteners read now in this study dpp4 did not lower abdominal inflammation in mice dr tabas explains these findings suggesting that they may be down to the difference between how dpp4 inhibitors work in the gut versus how they work in the liver '' dpp4 inhibitors lower blood sugar by inhibiting dpp4 in the gut but we have some evidence that dpp4 inhibitors in the gut also end up promoting inflammation in fat '' he states `` that cancels out the antiinflammatory effects the drugs may have when they reach inflammatory cells called macrophages in the fat '' '' from our studies '' adds dr tabas `` we know that dpp4 interacts with a molecule on these cells to increase inflammation if we could block that interaction we might be able stop the enzyme from causing inflammation and insulin resistance '' so the researchers targeted dpp4 in the liver cells instead of the gut this reduced adipose inflammation and lowered insulin resistance dpp4 inhibitors also decreased blood sugar toward human clinical trials as dr tabas reports `` inhibiting dpp4 specifically in liver cells attacks insulin resistance the core problem of type 2 diabetes at least in our preclinical models '' the researchers explain what the findings mean for future treatments of type 2 diabetes dr tabas says `` if we can develop ways to target liver dpp4 in people this may be a powerful new way to treat obesityinduced type 2 diabetes '' dr ahmed a hasan a medical officer and program director in the atherothrombosis coronary artery disease branch of the national heart lung and blood institute also comments on the findings he says `` this study reveals a potential new target for the treatment of type 2 diabetes and cardiometabolic disorders '' '' these findings may pave the way for a future clinical trial to test whether a new treatment approach based on this target could improve insulin resistance in diabetic patients more research is needed '' dr ahmed a hasanby finding a link to a condition that raises the risk of type 2 diabetes new research questions the health benefits of ketogenic diets is there a link between diabetes and the keto diet ketogenic diets are lowcarbohydrate highfat diets that have been shown to reduce weight they change metabolism so that energy comes from fat instead of sugar when researchers in switzlerland examined what happened to mice in the early stages of a ketogenic diet they found that the animals showed a poorer ability to regulate blood sugar compared with similar mice on a highfat highcarbohydrate diet in a paper on their work now published in the journal of physiology they note that `` even though keto dietfed animals appear healthy in the fasted state they exhibit decreased glucose tolerance to a greater extent than highfat dietfed animals '' the reason for this they found was that the livers of the keto dietfed mice were not responding as well to insulin this condition which is known as insulin resistance raises the risk of developing type 2 diabetes '' diabetes is one of the biggest health issues we face '' says study author christian wolfrum who is with the institute of food nutrition and health at eth zürich in switzerland insulin resistance insulin is a hormone that helps the body control levels of blood sugar or glucose if blood sugar stays above normal for long periods of time it becomes a condition called hyperglycemia that can lead to serious health problems this is the hallmark of diabetes in type 1 diabetes hyperglycemia develops because the pancreas does not make enough insulin in type 2 diabetes organs and tissues lose their ability to respond to insulin the pancreas tries to compensate by making more insulin but eventually this is not enough and leads to hyperglycemia normal blood sugar levels may not be so normal after all researchers have found that `` normal '' levels of blood glucose often mask spikes that are considerably higher than what is considered healthy read now there are a number of ways in which insulin helps control blood glucose levels one is by signaling to the liver to reduce glucose production and another is by helping muscles and tissues absorb glucose and convert it into energy insulin resistance is a `` complex metabolic disorder '' with no obvious single cause the liver becomes insulin resistant when it fails to reduce glucose production in response to insulin cells can also become insulin resistant when they need increasing amounts of the hormone to help them use glucose however the researchers found that the main reason for decreased glucose tolerance in the keto dietfed mice was due to insulin resistance in the liver `` rather than impaired glucose clearance and tissue glucose uptake '' despite extensive research into the causes of insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes they are not completely understood one thing that scientists do know is that fatlike substances called lipids are `` clearly associated with insulin resistance '' even here however many questions remain such as `` is the link due to circulating fats or to fat buildup in tissue '' ketogenic diets and ketosis by dramatically reducing intake of carbohydrates keto diets induce a metabolic state known as ketosis in this state cells that would normally get their energy from glucose switch to ketones the lack of carbohydrates makes the body break down fats into fatty acids and then into ketones keto diets are probably among the `` most studied '' approaches to weight loss of recent times a lot of research now backs the idea that keto diets have a sound `` physiological and biochemical basis '' and can significantly benefit cardiovascular health this is welcome news to many physicians for whom one of the biggest challenges that they face in their daily practices is treating obesity however while keto diets have a proven track record in tackling obesity some concerns remain many of these likely relate to a `` broad lack of knowledge about the physiological mechanisms involved '' mechanisms of insulin resistance not clear the new study helps plug some of this knowledge gap it suggests that insulin resistance in the liver can develop in the early stages of keto diets this now needs to be confirmed in humans also the underlying mechanisms that lead to insulin resistance are still unclear especially in relation to different diets this also needs to be explored further say the researchers another area that needs further research is the effect on the brain of the byproducts of fatty acid breakdown the researchers theory is that the fatty acid byproducts might have important `` signaling roles '' in the brain '' although ketogenic diets are known to be healthy our findings indicate that there may be an increased risk of insulin resistance with this type of diet that may lead to type 2 diabetes '' christian wolfrumby probing the effect that vitamin d3 has on the cells that make up the lining of blood vessels scientists at ohio university in athens oh have identified for the first time the role that the `` sunshine vitamin '' plays in preserving cardiovascular health the sunshine vitamin has been shown to preserve heart health in a paper published in the international journal of nanomedicine they describe how they used nanosensors and a cell model to identify the molecular mechanisms that vitamin d3 can trigger in the endothelium which is the thin layer of tissue that lines blood vessels it was previously believed that the endothelium served no other purpose than to act as an inert `` wrapper '' of the vascular system allowing both water and electrolytes to pass in and out of the bloodstream however advances over the past 30 years have revealed that the endothelium acts more like an organ that lines the whole of the circulatory system from the `` heart to the smallest capillaries '' and whose cells carry out many unique biological functions changes to the endothelium have been linked to several serious health problems including high blood pressure insulin resistance diabetes tumor growth virus infections and atherosclerosis which is a condition wherein fatty deposits can build up inside arteries and increase the risk of heart attack and stroke vitamin d3 has role beyond bone health the new study suggests that vitamin d3 a version of vitamin d that our bodies produce naturally when we expose our skin to the sun plays a key role in preserving and restoring the damage to the endothelium that occurs in these diseases some other natural sources of vitamin d3 include egg yolks and oily fish it is also obtainable in the form of supplements vitamin d3 is already wellknown for its role in bone health '' however '' explains senior author tadeusz malinski a professor in the department of chemistry and biochemistry `` in recent years in clinical settings people recognize that many patients who have a heart attack will have a deficiency of d3 '' '' it doesnt mean that the deficiency caused the heart attack '' he adds `` but it increased the risk of heart attack '' nanosensors probed effect of d3 on cells for their study prof malinski and colleagues developed a measuring system using nanosensors or tiny probes that are 1000 times smaller than the thickness of human hair and can operate at the level of atoms and molecules they used the nanosensors to track the impact of vitamin d3 on molecular mechanisms in human endothelial cells that had been treated to show the same type of damage that occurs from high blood pressure blood vessel discovery may prevent diabetes a new microscopy technique reveals that the transport of insulin across the endothelium differs to that suggested previously read now the findings suggest that vitamin d3 is a powerful trigger of nitric oxide which is a molecule that plays an important signaling role in the control of blood flow and the formation of blood clots in blood vessels the researchers also found that vitamin d3 significantly reduces oxidative stress in the vascular system they note that their study `` provides direct molecular insight to previously published observations that have suggested that vitamin d3 deficiencyinduced hypertension is associated with vascular oxidative stress '' the effects of vitamin d3 were similar in both caucasian and african american endothelial cells could d3 reverse cardiovascular damage the study authors note that while their findings came from tests performed on a cellular model of high blood pressure `` the implications of the influence of vitamin d3 on dysfunctional endothelium is much broader '' they suggest that vitamin d3 has the potential to significantly reverse the damage that high blood pressure diabetes atherosclerosis and other diseases inflict on the cardiovascular system '' there are not many '' prof malinski adds `` if any known systems which can be used to restore cardiovascular endothelial cells which are already damaged and vitamin d3 can do it '' '' this is a very inexpensive solution to repair the cardiovascular system we dont have to develop a new drug we already have it '' prof tadeusz malinskisome people find it harder to lose weight than others but why is this a new study has identified a molecule in fat cells that could be to blame researchers have uncovered one reason why some people may find it hard to lose weight researchers found that the fat cells of people who are obese show higher expression of a molecule called lysyl oxidase lox lox is associated with fibrosis or `` scarring '' of fat tissue which as previous research has shown can hamper weight loss efforts study coauthor dr katarina kos who works in the diabetes and obesity research group at the university of exeter medical school in the united kingdom and colleagues recently reported their findings in the journal metabolism it is thought that around 1 in 3 adults in the united states are obese which puts them at increased risk of type 2 diabetes stroke heart disease and some forms of cancer a lack of exercise and a poor diet are the primary causes of obesity so its no surprise that eating a healthful diet and increasing physical activity are the first strategies we try in an attempt to shed the pounds but these interventions can produce mixed results some individuals see the pounds fall off while others find it much more challenging the new study may have uncovered one explanation for the latter higher lox levels in people who are obese for their study dr kos and colleagues analyzed samples of abdominal fat tissue that had been taken from obese individuals before they underwent weight loss surgery compared with abdominal fat tissue samples of leaner subjects the analysis revealed that the fat tissue of obese people had greater expression of the lox molecule which is a cause of fat tissue fibrosis on further investigation the researchers found that the increase in lox expression was driven by an increase in oxygen deprivation and inflammation in fat cells which occurs when fat cells become larger weight loss breakthrough sunlight is key researchers suggest that lack of sunlight may be to blame for winter weight gain read now the scientists explain that when fat cells undergo this type of stress they lose their ability to store excess calories as a result these calories become stored as fat around important organs such as the liver and heart and this is associated with numerous health problems including heart disease and type 2 diabetes unfortunately studies have shown that fat tissue fibrosis can make it harder for individuals to lose weight `` but this does not mean that scarring makes weight loss impossible '' dr kos emphasizes '' adding some regular activity to a somewhat reduced energy intake for a longer period makes weight loss possible and helps the fat tissue not to become further overworked '' she continues `` we know that doing this improves our blood sugar and is key in the management of diabetes '' we need to look after our fat what is more the teams findings indicate that targeting the lox molecule could be one way to prevent fat cell fibrosis and possibly make weight loss easier but more studies are needed to confirm this theory dr kos notes that further research is also needed in order to identify other ways to prevent fat tissue fibrosis in the meantime she says that increasing our physical activity could help '' there is evidence that once fat tissue becomes scarred despite weight loss it may not recover fully '' she says `` we need to look after our fat tissue which can cease to cope if it is overworked when being forced to absorb more and more calories '' '' as a clinician '' dr kos concludes `` i would advise exercise or at least a walk after a meal which can make a great difference to our metabolic health ''its likely that we all enjoy a hot cup of tea or herbal infusion at least from time to time if not on a daily basis but what are the most important health benefits that some of these soothing teas can bring us read on to learn more about the top teas for our health some teas and herbal infusions have long been appreciated for their alleged health benefits but what does research have to say '' tea began as a medicine and grew into a beverage '' writes 19thcentury japanese scholar okakura kakuzo in his infamous publication the book of tea in it he speaks at length about the history of tea and the philosophy of the traditional japanese tea ceremony kakuzo was correct modern research about the history of teadrinking in the world confirms that this beverage was originally consumed less for pleasure or as a mindfulness aid calling for the drinker to take slow sips and be in the moment instead as shown by prof victor henry mair from the university of pennsylvania in philadelphia in the true history of tea early in its history the tea plant camellia sinensis became popular for its medicinal properties the tea plants main varieties camellia sinensis sinensis and camellia sinensis assamica are responsible for most of the tea brews that we are accustomed to black tea green tea white tea and oolong tea there are many other types of teas and infusions using various other plants such as aspalathus linearis which is better known as `` rooibos '' or `` redbush '' in this spotlight well give you an overview of the top five teas that can benefit your health 1 green tea a favorite with tea drinkers everywhere green tea has been praised for its medicinal properties for years some recent studies have now confirmed some of these benefits suggesting that green tea may protect various aspects of our health green tea can increase cognitive functioning to begin with this beverage has been found to enhance cognitive functioning with one study connecting it to better working memory the type of we use on a daytoday basis researchers from the university hospital of basel in switzerland found that healthy people who agreed to consume a soft drink containing 275 grams of green tea extract exhibited more intense activity in brain areas linked to working memory therefore participants who had ingested the green tea extract had better connectivity between the frontal and parietal lobes of the brain which are two regions involved in aspects of learning memory processes and decisionmaking the health benefits brought about by green tea have been linked with their content of polyphenols which are micronutrients with antioxidant properties as antioxidants these substances can protect against the action of free radicals which induce the type of cellular damage consistent with aging a 2017 study that was published in the journal of the american chemical society found that one such polyphenol found in green tea called epigallocatechin gallate may lower the risk of alzheimers disease by interacting with the `` building blocks '' that form betaamyloid plaques a buildup of these plaques in the brain is typical of this condition and impairs brain cell signaling epigallocatechin gallate this study suggests could stop betaamyloid from forming into plaques potentially helping to keep alzheimers at bay this same green tea polyphenol has also been said to slow down the growth of tumor cells of certain types of cancer such as pancreatic cancer research that was led by the los angeles biomedical research institute in california has shown that epigallocatechin gallate can disrupt the metabolism of pancreatic cancer cells thereby impairing their growth 2 jasmine tea what we refer to as `` jasmine tea '' is a type of beverage that usually has green tea at its base to which jasmine flowers are added for an enriched aroma jasmine tea is an important component of the diet of one of the longestliving populations in the world but the benefits of jasmine tea arent solely due to the antioxidant effects of the tea plant since jasmine blooms also bring their own medicinal properties to the mix in the book ikigai the japanese secret to a long and happy life authors héctor garcía and francesc miralles note that the inhabitants of a healthy longlived community in the okinawa prefecture of japan are avid drinkers of sanpincha a special blend of green tea and jasmine '' okinawans drink more sanpincha a mix of green tea and jasmine flowers than any other kind of tea '' they write suggesting that this blend may play a role in keeping the inhabitants of okinawa healthy and mentally agile well into old age this may be because like the tea plant jasmine flowers contain antioxidants which may protect cells from agerelated damage what are the best foods to fight aging read about the top five foods that will help you to stay young in body and mind read now jasmine itself has been linked with improved physical wellbeing and is said to reduce the impact of stress that is why some researchers have experimented with compounds derived from this plant in the search of better therapies for instance prof eliezer flescher from tel aviv university in israel noticed that methyl jasmonate which is a compound obtained from jasmonic acid found in the jasmine plant induces the death of cervical cancer cells and if you happen to enjoy drinking jasmine tea simply because you love the way it smells theres actually a good reason for that research that was published in the european journal of applied physiology explained that the smell of jasmine tea is soothing able to calm nerves and able to help regulate mood 3 rooibos tea another type of tea with antioxidant properties is rooibos or `` redbush tea '' which is prepared from the aspalathus linearis plant native to south africa rooibos tea may protect liver health research has suggested that the antioxidant effects of rooibos are similar to if not quite as strong as those of green tea a recent study on the rat model has suggested that the antioxidants in rooibos tea may protect the liver from oxidative stress helping to render this organ more resilient to induced damage the researchers who conducted the study noted that their findings suggest that rooibos tea or rooibosderived dietary supplements may offer a useful health boost '' results from this study suggest that the daily intake of unfermented rooibos herbal tea or a derived commercial rooibos supplement may benefit human health by providing the liver with an enhanced antioxidant capacity to reduce damage induced by toxicants '' moreover rooibos has also been cited as helpful in lowering blood pressure and relaxing tense muscles suggesting that the active ingredient in this instance might be one of the flavonoids pigments that it contains chrysoeriol unlike green or black tea rooibos does not contain any caffeine so it wont have the same stimulating effects this makes it safe to drink well into the evening 4 hibiscus tea those of you who enjoy the refreshing taste of a more sour brew may also be familiar with herbal infusions of hibiscus a plant whose flowers can be used not just to make invigorating beverages but also to give a subtle `` punch '' to salads or as an elegant garnish for sophisticated dishes hibiscus tea is an antioxidant and may bring cardiovascular benefits the most commonly used variety is hibiscus sabdariffa also known as the `` roselle '' for the tea or more correctly `` tisane '' herbal tea its calyces are typically used although other parts of the plant such as the leaves seeds and roots are safe for consumption studies have suggested that extracts from the hibiscus calyx and hibiscus leaves have antioxidant and antitumoral effects therefore they may protect against the aging action of free radicals at a cellular level as well as fight certain types of leukemia cells hibiscus tea has also been tied to cardiovascular benefits helping to regulate systolic and diastolic blood pressure that is blood pressure during and inbetween heart beats respectively though not so commonly used to brew tea hibiscus leaves have also been linked repeatedly to a wide array of health benefits thus the polyphenols in hibiscus leaves may help to induce tumor cell death in skin cancer according to a 2015 study another study from the same year also argued that hibiscus leaf extracts could inhibit the action of prostate cancer cells 5 lemon verbena tea another herbal tea whose medicinal properties are getting increasingly recognized is that made out of lemon verbena scientifically dubbed aloysia citrodora infusions with lemon verbena are said to help with weight management it is the citrusflavored cousin of a betterknown plant that has been used in herbal infusions for years verbena or vervain verbena officinalis infusions made with lemon verbena are great for those who like me prefer a subtler citrusy aroma in their hot drinks rather than the strong lemony flavor of commonly commercialized citrus tea blends the first time that i came upon this plant sold as a tisane herb was in a local organic shop that was selling it as `` weight loss tea '' in fact studies have shown that the polyphenols in this plant can decrease the formation of fatty acids marking its potential use in the treatment of obesityrelated health issues researchers have also suggested that lemon verbena extracts may help to lower inflammatory markers levels in the blood of some people with multiple sclerosis '' results demonstrate that supplementation with lemon verbena extracts may affect the cytokine inflammation markers profile depending on the clinical subtype '' the study authors conclude having a cup of your tea or tisane of choice may be a pleasant way to carve out some selfindulgence time and stimulate your bodily and mental wellbeing in a subtle way but always keep in mind that as the saying goes `` one swallow does not a summer make '' and the most potent health benefits are best reaped by leading a healthful wholesome lifestyle we picked linked items based on the quality of products and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you we partner with some of the companies that sell these products which means healthline uk and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a links aboveheart disease is still the number one killer in the united states in this spotlight we outline 16 foods that when consumed as part of a wellrounded diet might help to keep your heart healthy how can you improve your heart health with food there are many things you can do to help keep your heart healthy and diseasefree you can schedule an annual checkup exercise daily quit smoking or take steps to reduce the level of stress in your life all of these things can have a positive effect on heart health but one of the simplest lifestyle changes that will benefit your heart is watching what you eat nearly 6 million people are currently living with heart failure and around half of these will die within 5 years of being diagnosed the centers for disease control and prevention cdc warn that eating foods high in fat cholesterol or sodium can be very bad for the heart so when taking steps to minimize the risk of heart disease diet is a good place to start in this article we examine some of the best foods for ensuring that you keep a robust and healthy heart 1 asparagus asparagus is a natural source of folate which helps to prevent an amino acid called homocysteine from building up in the body high homocysteine levels have been linked with an increased risk of heartrelated conditions such as coronary artery disease and stroke 2 beans peas chickpeas and lentils beans peas chickpeas and lentils otherwise known as pulses or legumes can all significantly reduce levels of lowdensity lipoprotein ldl or `` bad cholesterol '' they are also packed with fiber protein and antioxidant polyphenols all of which have beneficial effects on the heart and general health 3 berries berries are also full of antioxidant polyphenols which help to reduce heart disease risk berries are a great source of fiber folate iron calcium vitamin a and vitamin c and they are low in fat 4 broccoli some studies suggest that regularly eating steamed broccoli can lower cholesterol levels and prevent heart disease 5 chia seeds and flaxseeds these seeds are a rich plantbased source of omega3 fatty acids such as alphalinolenic acid omega3s have many beneficial effects such as helping to lower levels of triglycerides ldl and total cholesterol they also reduce blood pressure and minimize the buildup of fatty plaques in the arteries omega3s decrease the risk of disorders that can lead to heart attack such as thrombosis and arrhythmias 6 dark chocolate dark chocolate is a rare example of a food that tastes amazing and is good for you in moderation dark chocolate delicious and hearthealthy scientists now believe that dark chocolate has protective benefits against atherosclerosis which is when plaque builds up inside the arteries increasing risk of heart attack and stroke dark chocolate seems to prevent two of the mechanisms implicated in atherosclerosis stiffness of the arteries and white blood cell adhesion which is when white blood cells stick to the walls of blood vessels what is more studies have found that increasing dark chocolates flavanol content which is the compound that makes it tasty and moreish does not diminish these protective benefits 7 coffee also in the `` almost too good to be true '' camp is coffee one recent study found that regularly drinking coffee was linked with a decreased risk of developing heart failure and stroke however it is important to bear in mind that this study which used machine learning to assess data from the framingham heart study can only observe an association between factors and can not conclusively identify cause and effect could coffee stop clogged arteries consuming more than three cups of coffee every day may lower the risk of atherosclerosis read now 8 fish high in omega3s fish is a strong source of hearthelping omega3 fatty acids and protein but it is low in saturated fat people who have heart disease or are at risk of developing it are often recommended to increase their intake of omega3s by eating fish this is because they lower the risk of abnormal heartbeats and slow the growth of plaque in the arteries according to the american heart association aha we should eat a 35ounce serving of fatty fish such as salmon mackerel herring lake trout sardines or albacore tuna at least twice per week 9 green tea a 2011 systematic review found that drinking green tea is associated with a small reduction in cholesterol which as we know is a main contributor to heart disease and stroke but the review could not pinpoint how much green tea someone would have to drink to receive any health benefits in 2014 another review studied the effects of drinking green tea on people with high blood pressure the report concluded that green tea was associated with a reduction in blood pressure but the authors were unable to determine if this modest reduction could help to prevent heart disease 10 nuts almonds hazelnuts peanuts pecans pistachios and walnuts are all hearthealthy nut options these nuts are full of protein fiber minerals vitamins and antioxidants like fish and flaxseeds walnuts are also ripe with omega3 fatty acids making them a hearthealthy snack to have on the go 11 liver of all the organ meats liver is the most nutrientdense in particular liver is bulging with folic acid iron chromium copper and zinc which increase the bloods hemoglobin level and help to keep our heart healthy 12 oatmeal because oatmeal is rich in soluble fiber it may help to reduce the risk of heart disease a 2008 review of the evidence concluded that oatbased products significantly reduce ldl and total cholesterol without any adverse effects 13 red wine sort of many studies have noted the potential health benefits of the antioxidants in red wine however it is unlikely that the benefits of the antioxidants outweigh the dangers of alcohol red wine contains beneficial antioxidants but bear in mind that it should only be consumed in moderation recently however a new study proposed that these same antioxidants could form the basis of a new stent for use during angioplasty the process where narrow or obstructed veins are widened to treat atherosclerosis the researchers behind that study are currently developing a new kind of stent that releases red winelike antioxidants into the blood to promote healing prevent blood clotting and reduce inflammation during angioplasty it is worth noting that drinking alcohol in general is not healthy for your heart in fact it is vitally important for cardiovascular health to drink alcohol in moderation if at all 14 spinach you can help to maintain a healthy heart rhythm by regularly consuming good sources of magnesium spinach is one of the best sources of dietary magnesium and consumption of popeyes favorite food is associated with a raft of health benefits 15 tomatoes tomatoes have lots of nutrients that might help keep our hearts healthy the little red fruits are chockfull of fiber potassium vitamin c folate and choline which are all good for the heart as well as helping to keep heart disease at bay potassium benefits muscles and bones and helps prevent kidney stones from forming scientists have argued that increasing potassium intake while decreasing sodium intake is the most important dietary change when attempting to reduce the risk of heart disease 16 vegetables the aha advise that we eat eight or more servings of fruit and vegetables each day vegetables are low in fat and calories but rich in fiber minerals and vitamins a healthful amount of veggies in the diet can help to moderate weight and blood pressurethere are a million things that we do every day without thinking brushing our teeth drying our hair after a shower and unlocking our phone screen so we can check our messages are all part of our routine but what takes place in the brain as we learn a new habit what happens in the brain when habits take shape whats something youve learned to do without thinking it might be locking the door behind you as you leave which could lead to some panic later as you wonder if you actually remembered to do it it might be driving to work have you ever had that uncanny experience of finding yourself at your destination without fully remembering how you got there i certainly have and its all thanks to the brains trusty autopilot mode habits drive our lives so much so that sometimes we might want to break the habit as the saying goes and experience something new but habits are a useful tool when we do something enough times we become effortlessly good at it which is perhaps why aristotle reportedly believed that `` excellence is not an act but a habit '' so what does habit formation look like in the brain how do our neural networks behave as we learn something and consolidate it into an effortless behavior through repetition these are the questions that ann graybiel and her colleagues from the massachusetts institute of technology in chestnut hill set out to answer in a recent study the findings of which are published in the journal current biology bookending neural signals although a habitual action seems so simple and effortless it actually typically involves a string of small necessary movements such as unlocking the car getting into it adjusting the mirrors securing the seatbelt and so on this complex set of movements that amount to one routine action that we perform unconsciously is called `` chunking '' and although we know that it exists exactly how `` chunks '' form and stabilize has remained mysterious so far could this protein hold the key to memory to store or not to store learn about the protein that may hold the key to memory retention read now the new study now suggests that some brain cells are tasked with `` bookending '' the chunks that correspond to habitual actions in another study graybiel and her former team found that the striatum a region of the brain previously associated with decisionmaking also plays an important role in acquiring habits working with mice the team noted that the patterns of signals transmitted between neurons in the striatum shifted as the animals were taught a new sequence of actions turning in one direction at a sound signal while navigating a maze which then evolved into a habit at the beginning of the learning process the neurons in the mices striata emitted a continuous string of signals the scientists saw but as the mices actions started to consolidate into habitual movements the neurons fired their distinctive signals only at the beginning and at the end of the task performed when a signaling pattern takes root explain graybiel and colleagues a habit has taken shape and breaking it becomes a difficult endeavor brain patterns that indicate habits although edifying graybiels previous efforts did not establish for certain that the signaling patterns observed in the brain were related to habit formation they could simply have been motor commands that regulated the mices running behavior in order to confirm the idea that the patterns corresponded to the chunking associated with habit formation graybiel and her current team devised a different set of experiments in the new study they set out to teach rats to press two levers repeatedly in a specific order the researchers used reward conditioning to motivate the animals if they pressed the levers in the correct sequence they were offered chocolate milk to ensure that there would be no doubt regarding the solidity of the experiments results and that they would be able to identify brain activity patterns related to habit formation rather than anything else the scientists taught the rats different sequences sure enough once the animals had learned to press the levers in the sequence established by their trainers the team noticed the same `` bookending '' pattern in the striatum sets of neurons would fire signals at the beginning and end of a task thus delimitating a `` chunk '' `` i think '' explains graybiel `` this more or less proves that the development of bracketing patterns serves to package up a behavior that the brain and the animals consider valuable and worth keeping in their repertoire '' '' it really is a highlevel signal that helps to release that habit and we think the end signal says the routine has been done '' ann graybiel finally the team also noted the formation of another complementary pattern of activity in a group of inhibitory brain cells called `` interneurons '' in the striatum '' the interneurons '' explains lead study author nuné martiros of harvard university in cambridge ma `` were activated during the time when the rats were in the middle of performing the learned sequence '' she adds that the interneurons `` could possibly be preventing the principal neurons from initiating another routine until the current one was finished '' '' the discovery of this opposite activity by the interneurons '' martiros concludes `` also gets us one step closer to understanding how brain circuits can actually produce this pattern of activity ''eat well for a long and healthy life – thats a mantra that were all familiar with but what are the best foods to help us achieve that goal in this article we give you an overview of some of the most healthful and nutritious foods what are the best foods for a healthful diet we investigate official figures indicate that currently the top three countries in the world with the highest life expectancy are the principality of monaco japan and singapore these are places where the inhabitants experience a high quality of life and an important element of that is eating healthful meals often we find praise for `` superfoods '' in the media – foods so high in nutritional value that they are seen as dietary superheroes nutritionists reject the term `` superfoods '' as a buzzword that can influence people to place too high an expectation on a limited range of foods when in reality a balanced diet and healthful lifestyle require more effort than eating your fiveaday still there are certain foods that are more nutritious than others and many that as research has shown have a protective effect against a range of diseases here we give you an overview of some of the best foods that you may want to consider including in your diet in your quest for a happy healthy life edamame soybeans edamame or fresh soybeans have been a staple of asian cuisine for generations but they have also been gaining popularity on the western front of late soybeans are often sold in snack packs but they are also added to a varied range of dishes from soups to ricebased meals though they are served as cooked and seasoned on their own too edamame and tofu are rich in isoflavones which may have anticancer properties the beans are rich in isoflavones a type of phytoestrogen – that is plantderived estrogenlike substances isoflavones are known to have antiinflammatory antioxidant anticancer and antimicrobial properties thus they can help to regulate the inflammatory response of the body slow down cellular aging fight microbes as well as reportedly protect against certain types of cancer edamame are rich in two types of isoflavones in particular genistein and daidzein a study covered last year on medical news today found that genistein could be used to improve breast cancer treatment in the meantime the study authors note that `` lifetime intake of soy has been linked to reduced risk of breast cancer '' so we may want to include soybeans in our normal diet tofu soybean curd similarly tofu a white cheeselike product made of soybean curds has been linked to a wealth of health benefits for the same reasons tofu is often found cooked in typical eastern asian dishes it can be fried baked or boiled for instance in soups as a soy product it is rich in isoflavones whose health benefits weve outlined above it is also a good source of protein and it contains all the essential amino acids that our bodies need to synthesize protein moreover it is also rich in minerals which our bodies need to keep our teeth and bones strong and healthy and to derive energy tofu is a source of calcium iron manganese selenium phosphorous magnesium zinc and copper some specialists also suggest that eating tofu can make you feel fuller for longer so incorporating it into your meals may help to prevent overeating carrots this common culinary ingredient best known in its orange variety is famously recommended for its high content of betacarotene a pigment and carotenoid that gives the widespread version of this root vegetable its color carrots can protect against agerelated eyesight damage betacarotene can be converted by our bodies into vitamin a which according to the national institutes of health nih `` is involved in immune function vision reproduction and cellular communication '' our bodies can not produce vitamin a on their own so it must be derived from our diet this pigment is also an antioxidant that can protect the cells in our bodies from the aging damage caused by free radicals moreover research has shown that foods rich in carotenoids and of course carrots are a prime example here can protect against agerelated macular degeneration the vision damage caused by old age some varieties of carrots such as white carrots do not contain the orange pigment betacarotene but they do all contain falcarinol a nutrient which some studies claim may have a protective effect against cancer while raw carrots may be best for health as they retain their nutrients there are also ways of cooking carrots that can keep most of their nutrients `` locked in '' in an interview one researcher who investigated the anticancer effect of falcarinol from carrots kirsten brandt from newcastle university in the united kingdom suggests that we may want to boil our carrots whole if we want them cooked but still bursting with nutrients '' chopping up your carrots increases the surface area so more of the nutrients leach out into the water while they are cooked by keeping them whole and chopping them up afterwards you are locking in nutrients and the taste so the carrot is better for you all round '' cruciferous vegetables another important type of food on our list are cruciferous vegetables also known as `` brassica vegetables '' which include a wide array of green foods such as cabbage broccoli brussels sprouts cauliflower bok choy radish and kale cruciferous vegetables can bring a wealth of health benefits these vegetables boast an especially rich nutrient content including many vitamins c e k and folate minerals potassium calcium and selenium and carotenoids lutein betacarotene and zeaxanthin cruciferous vegetables also contain glucosinolates the substances that give these greens their characteristic pungent flavor these substances have been found to bring diverse health benefits some glucosinolates seem to regulate the bodys stress and inflammation response they have antimicrobial properties and some of them are being investigated for their anticancer potential one recent study covered on mnt found that leafy greens including some cruciferous vegetables such as kale and collard greens helped to slow down cognitive decline consequently the study researchers suggest that `` adding a daily serving of green leafy vegetables to your diet may be a simple way to foster your brain health '' kale broccoli and cabbage have also been shown to have a protective effect on heart health thanks to their vitamin k content finally cruciferous vegetables are also a great source of soluble fiber which plays a role in regulating blood sugar levels and diminishing the absorption of fat thus helping to prevent excess weight gain salmon recent studies have suggested that consumption of meat mostly red meat but also some kinds of poultry meat could be harmful to our health in the long run a good alternative for protein in this case is fish and salmon in particular affords many nutritional benefits salmon could protect cognitive health researchers say salmon is packed with protein and also contains plenty of omega3 fatty acids which is said to be beneficial for eyesight research has demonstrated that omega3 protects against dryeye syndrome characterized by insufficient lubrication of the eyes which can lead to soreness and blurred vision moreover omega3 fatty acids have been associated with brain health and research suggests that they can stave off cognitive decline associated with aging salmon also has a high potassium content and according to a new study reported on mnt last autumn potassium can prevent the onset of heart disease additionally this type of fish is rich in the mineral selenium which contributes to the health of the thyroid gland the thyroid gland helps to regulate hormonal activity and is involved in metabolic processes what are the best diets for 2018 learn which diets researchers recommend for a healthy life read now although both farmed and wild salmon are available on the market wild salmon has been found to be more nutritious overall with a higher protein content and also to have less saturated fat which means that it is more healthful and better for weight management however farmed salmon is a more sustainable resource and specialists say that the differences between farmed and wild caught salmon may not be so stark as to motivate us to prefer one type over the other citrus fruits finally citrus fruits are the unsung heroes of a healthful diet these include a number of fruits that are now available worldwide such as oranges grapefruit lemons limes clementines mandarins and tangerines the flavonoids in citrus fruits have been cited in connection to longer lifespans for a long time citrus fruits have been recommended by nutritionists and grandmothers alike for their high content of vitamin c which has antioxidant properties and is said to bring a wide array of health benefits including to reduce inflammatory damage and to fend off infections specialists point out however that this type of fruits goes well beyond just vitamin c when it comes to nutritional content '' the fruits are abundant in other macronutrients including sugars dietary fiber potassium folate calcium thiamin niacin vitamin b6 phosphorus magnesium copper riboflavin and pantothenic acid '' if this list of dietary goodies hasnt colored you impressed the specialists then go on to explain how citrus fruits contain even more organic compounds such as flavonoids coumarins and carotenoids that have been said to have protective effects against cancer cardiovascular diseases and neurodegenerative diseases research has shown that flavonoids in which citrus fruits are particularly rich can `` prevent or delay chronic diseases caused by obesity '' flavonoids have also garnered a lot of scientific attention for their anticancer potential and consumption of especially flavonoidrich citrus fruits has been associated with a significantly prolonged lifespan the inhabitants of the japanese prefecture of okinawa known to be some of the longestliving populations of the world regularly eat shikuwasa also known as `` shequasar '' a citrus fruit typical of the region which contains more flavonoids than most other citrus fruits drinking shikuwasa juice rich in flavonoid content has also been linked to better liver health although all of the foods mentioned above are appreciated for their significant health benefits we should not forget that wellbeing and longevity can not be achieved without a balanced inclusive diet and a healthful lifestyle moreover current studies suggest that our genetic makeup may have an important say as to which foods work best for our health so keeping our list of nutritious foods in mind make sure you follow the healthful diet that is most effective for youwhen it comes to new years resolutions eating better is at the top of our list but which diet plan is the best a panel of health experts on behalf of us news world report reveal the toprated diets for 2018 us news world report reveal the best diets for 2018 it is estimated that around 45 million people in the united states go on a diet each year with weight loss being the primary goal however whether youre dieting to lose weight or simply to improve overall health sticking to a specific eating plan can be challenging with so many diets to choose from how can you tell which one will work for you us news world report put together a panel of health experts every year to evaluate the most popular diets in the us this year the experts assessed 40 diets ranking them from lowest to highest in seven categories including the best diets for weight loss diabetes and heart health so we take a look at some of the key results the best diets for weight loss for the majority of dieters weight loss is the ultimate goal but losing weight and keeping it off is far from easy research suggests that approximately 30–35 percent of weight lost from dieting is regained within 1 year but it is possible to maintain weight loss its just a matter of finding the right eating plan the us news world report panel of experts evaluated 40 popular diets for their effects on both short and longterm weight loss noting that some people want to lose weight quickly while others want to maintain their weight loss for years to come the health experts rated weight watchers as the best diet on both accounts scoring 4 out of 5 for shortterm weight loss and 35 out of 5 for longterm weight loss a highfat diet without the weight gain study says its possible researchers say that there could be a way to avoid weight gain due to a highfat diet read now one of the longestrunning wellknown commercial diets weight watchers incorporates a points system wherein foods and beverages are assigned points based on their nutritional values and dieters are assigned a daily points allowance according to us news world report the expert panel `` appreciated the programs support system which helps dieters keep the pounds off '' the volumetrics diet came in at second place for best weight loss diet scoring 38 out of 5 for shortterm weight loss and 33 out of 5 for longterm weight loss designed by barbara rolls who is a professor of nutrition working at pennsylvania state university in centre county the volumetrics diet focuses on putting foods with lowenergy density such as lowfat milk grains and nonstarchy fruits and vegetables at the forefront of ones diet as well as limiting foods with highenergy density the best diets for heart health heart disease is the leading cause of death for men and women in the us killing around 610000 people in the country every year a poor diet can increase the risk of heart disease because eating food high in fat can lead to high blood pressure high cholesterol levels and obesity which are major risk factors for the condition but which eating plan is best for a healthy heart for this category the health experts analyzed each of the 40 diets and gave them average hearthealth ratings the dietary approaches to stop hypertension dash diet took first place in this category developed by the national heart lung and blood institute a part of the national institutes of health nih the dash diet is high in fruits vegetables whole grains fish poultry and lowfat dairy but it limits foods high in sugar and saturated and trans fats the dash diet was also ranked the best overall diet the mediterranean diet which emphasizes consuming fish and seafood at least twice weekly alongside regular consumption of fruits vegetables legumes and whole grains took joint second place for best hearthealthy diet alongside the ornish diet with the ornish diet fat is limited to 10 percent of daily calories and foods are divided into five groups from the least to most healthful the best diets for diabetes the mediterranean diet not only ranked highly for one of the best hearthealthy diets but it also took the crown for the best diabetes diet scoring 37 out of 5 it is estimated that around 303 million people in the us are living with diabetes wherein blood glucose levels become too high due to the bodys inability to produce or effectively use insulin although eating a healthful diet is important for all of us people with diabetes need to be extra cautious skipping meals or eating the wrong foods may lead to problematic highs and lows in blood glucose levels according to the panel `` the mediterranean diet is a great option for preventing or controlling diabetes some research has shown that diabetics on a mediterranean diet may improve their levels of hemoglobin a1c a measure of blood sugar over time '' the dash diet makes yet another appearance here ranking second in the best diabetes diet category with the experts noting that `` its menu looks a lot like widely accepted nutritional guidelines for those with the condition '' whichever eating plan that you decide is best for you its important to note that physical activity is just as important as the foods you eat current guidelines recommend that adults should engage in at least 150 minutes of moderateintensity or 75 minutes of vigorousintensity aerobic activity every weeka small pilot study of older people suggests that taking a daily supplement of a nutrient that is present naturally in foods may improve artery health and blood pressure a certain type of supplement may promote healthy arterial aging and reduced blood pressure the researchers at the university of colorado boulder found that the supplement called nicotinamide riboside mimics some of the effects of caloric restriction and activates several identical biological pathways studies of caloric restriction which have been done mainly in rodents and fruit flies and not so much in humans indicate that reducing daily calorie intake by a third may delay the aging process and lengthen lifespan the new study found that taking nicotinamide riboside supplements significantly improved blood pressure in people with mild hypertension or elevated blood pressure should the results be confirmed in a larger clinical trial the researchers think that they could have important implications in biomedicine such as increasing treatment options for elevated blood pressure elevated blood pressure and stage 1 high blood pressure are now defined as a blood pressure of 12080 or 13989 millimeters of mercury respectively which although is not high enough to justify medication is high enough to raise the risk for a heart attack or stroke currently the recommended options for people with elevated blood pressure include changes to diet and increasing physical activity senior study author doug seals who is a professor and researcher in the department of integrative physiology and his colleagues report their findings in a paper due to be published in the journal nature communications stiff arteries blood pressure and aging in a western culture stiffer arteries and the high blood pressure that results from them as we age is so common that it is accepted as a normal consequence of aging for example the american heart associations aha explanation of high blood pressure states `` the normal aging process can cause the big elastic arteries to become stiff over time '' in the united states an estimated 103 million adults have high blood pressure and this figure is expected to rise as the population continues to age however there is evidence that stiff arteries and high blood pressure are not necessarily a normal consequence of aging although genetics plays a role preserving artery health as we reach our 70s and beyond also depends on things that we can do something about such as lifestyle and diet nicotinamide riboside nicotinamide riboside is a trace nutrient present in certain foods such as cows milk and in higher concentrations in dietary supplement form studies have indicated that the nutrient contains `` unique properties as a vitamin b3 '' that include raising insulin sensitivity boosting the effects of exercise protecting the brain and resisting the harmful effects of a highfat diet high cholesterol in late life may mean better brain health learn how having a total cholesterol level higher in later life than it was in midlife is linked to a lower risk of marked cognitive decline read now for their study prof seals and his colleagues recruited 24 lean and healthy men and women from the boulder area their ages ranged from 55 to 79 and they were put into two groups one of the groups took 500 milligrams of nicotinamide riboside chloride twice per day for 6 weeks then spent another 6 weeks taking a placebo the other group followed the opposite pattern they took a placebo for 6 weeks and then a twicedaily 500milligram dose of nicotinamide riboside chloride for another 6 weeks the team analyzed blood samples that the subjects gave at the end of each treatment period and they took other `` physiological measurements '' at these times there were no serious side effects an evolutionary survival mechanism the results showed that taking 1000 milligrams of nicotinamide riboside each day increased levels of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide nad+ by 60 percent nad+ is a compound that activates sirtuins a group of enzymes thought to be responsible for the beneficial effects that calorie restriction has on healthy aging and longevity the compound levels of which tend to wane with age is involved in many of the bodys metabolic processes there is a theory which is supported by research that our bodies are programmed by evolution to conserve nad+ when food is scarce and that this is activated when we restrict calorie intake more recent research has also begun to investigate the possibility that older adults might regain this protective property and age more healthily by taking supplements of `` nad+ precursors '' such as nicotinamide riboside the results also found that nicotinamide riboside supplementation caused a drop in systolic blood pressure of 10 points in 13 of the participants who had elevated blood pressure or stage 1 high blood pressure this represents a 25 percent reduction in the risk of having a heart attack more work now needed to confirm findings the researchers conclude that their paper is a step forward in highlighting the potential benefits of nicotinamide riboside supplementation in older adults however they point out that there is still a lot of work to do to confirm that it is safe and effective they hope to investigate the specific impact of nicotinamide riboside on artery health and blood pressure more robustly in a larger clinical trial in the meantime another trial is about to investigate the effect of the supplement in older people with mild cognitive impairment a condition that often precedes alzheimers disease '' this was the first ever study to give this novel compound to humans over a period of time we found that it is welltolerated and appears to activate some of the same key biological pathways that calorie restriction does '' prof doug seals the study was partfunded by chromadex who make the supplements that the researchers usedapps are available for everything these days from shopping to entertainment and travel apps that claim to help look after your mental health and wellbeing are also available so we have selected the best apps for mental health mental health apps may help with conditions such as anxiety and depression as well as enhance psychological wellbeing approximately 483 million adults in the united states are faced with a mental health condition each year and 98 million of those are serious conditions that limit the activities of everyday life among us adults aged 18–44 mood disorders such as depression and bipolar disorder are now the third most common reason for hospitalizations furthermore those who live with severe mental illness are more likely to face chronic medical conditions and die around 25 years earlier exercising regularly and eating a healthful diet can boost mental health and wellbeing significantly help to reduce symptoms of depression anxiety and stress and increase endorphins responsible for happiness apps focus on protecting or improving mental health using methods including meditation hypnosis cognitive behavioral therapy cbt and providing a valuable support network medical news today have put together a list of the top 10 apps that can help to enhance your wellbeing and look after your mental health calm android free iphone free calm was branded as apples `` app of the year '' in 2017 the app is designed to reduce anxiety improve sleep and help you to feel happier calm focuses on the four key areas of meditation breathing sleep and relaxation with the aim of bringing joy clarity and peace to your daily life the app delivers meditations that can help you to destress as well as breathing programs music and sounds from nature to relax your mind and body and promote better sleep calm is the perfect app if you are new to meditation but it also offers programs for more advanced users meditation sessions are available in lengths of 3–25 minutes to fit in with your schedule headspace android free iphone free headspace uses mindfulness and meditation to help you perform at your best each day the apps mission is to provide you with the essential tools to achieve a happier healthier life whether you need to build healthier relationships find a place of calm keep your mind fit or reduce stress headspace has hundreds of themed mindfulness and meditation sessions to support you the app reports that meditation reduces daily stress and improves focus and attention what is more using headspace is suggested to enhance compassionate behavior toward others in just 3 weeks moodnotes iphone $ 399 moodnotes is a thought journal and mood diary the app can be used to capture your feelings and improve your thinking habits through the implementation of cbt and positive psychology track your mood and increase selfawareness of what influences it learn to recognize `` traps '' in your thinking and ways to rethink the situation if you happen to enter a `` thinking trap '' moodnotes will provide suggestions and useful perspectives to reduce stress and enhance wellbeing progress is viewable in the helpful `` insights '' dashboard googleadslotinfopush { '' slotname '' mnt_dlb1 '' slotcontainer '' mnt_dlb1_container } moodpath android free iphone free moodpath is your pocketsized mental health companion whether you are facing a rough patch or have concerns about your mental health the apps goal is to support you through the difficult times and guide you out the other side moodpath asks daily questions in order to assess your wellbeing and screen for symptoms of depression the screening progress aims to increase your awareness of your thoughts emotions and feelings after a period of 2 weeks the app generates an electronic document that you can discuss with a healthcare professional more than 150 videos and psychological exercises are available to help you understand your mood and strengthen your mental health pacifica android free iphone free pacifica is an app with anxiety and stress in mind it provides a toolbox to deal with daily anxiety and stress along with a highly supportive community of likeminded individuals pacifica helps you to break cycles of unhelpful thoughts feelings and behaviors through methods such as cbt mindfulness meditation mood tracking and relaxation the app houses audio lessons and activities that help you to cope with stress and depression and it sets daily challenges to help you tackle anxiety one day at a time and reach your longterm goals superbetter android free iphone free superbetter is a game focusing on increasing resilience and the ability to remain strong optimistic and motivated when presented with challenging obstacles in life a study by the university of pennsylvania in philadelphia found that when people played superbetter for 30 days their mood improved symptoms of anxiety and depression decreased and selfbelief to achieve goals increased the app will help you to adopt new habits improve your skills strengthen relationships complete meaningful projects and achieve lifelong dreams superbetter also has the potential to help you beat depression and anxiety cope with chronic illness and recover from posttraumatic stress disorder ptsd 7 cups android free iphone free if you are feeling lonely sad stressed or worried 7 cups could be the perfect app for you it provides online therapy and emotional support for anxiety and depression there are more than 160000 trained listeners and licensed therapists who are available to anonymously speak with 247 speak your mind and confide in listeners without the fear of being judged these listeners can be searched for based on their experience or their specialties such as bullying panic attacks eating disorders relationship breakups and many more affordable therapy with an online therapist can commence onetoone in a confidential setting anxiety relief hypnosis android free iphone free anxiety relief hypnosis is an app suggested to help improve relaxation and reduce anxiety within just 1–3 weeks of use the apps developers say that hypnosis can decrease anxious thoughts and enhance your response to relaxation which in turn resets your behavior and enables an improved response to stress the app provides an audio session read by a certified hypnotherapist together with calming music and sounds from nature to aid relaxation the `` awaken at end '' feature can be disabled to allow you to fall into restful sleep at bedtime happify android free iphone free happify is a space to overcome negative thoughts and stress and build resilience whether you are feeling stressed anxious or sad happify helps you to regain control of your thoughts and feelings in fact 86 percent of the apps users report feeling better about their lives after 2 months of using it happify employs techniques and evidencebased interventions in the areas of cbt positive psychology and mindfulness to help you break old and unhealthful patterns and form new healthful habits the app offers activities and games to improve your life satisfaction and ability to fight negativity your emotional wellbeing is calculated as a happiness score that you can improve upon each week talkspace android free iphone free talkspace is a counseling and therapy app that connects users with a convenient affordable and confidential way to deal with anxiety stress depression relationship issues and chronic illness a free consultation is provided with a matching agent to identify the ideal therapist for your needs based on several factors more than 1000 licensed therapists are available who specialize in anxiety phobia depression domestic violence ptsd and more after upgrading and becoming a member access is given to a secure chat room wherein you can raise and discuss your worries with your private counselor the apps pricing plans are described as being approximately 80 percent lower than traditional officebased appointments how to be happy in 2018 find out how to maintain your happiness this year read nowcancer is the leading cause of death across the globe for years now researchers have led meticulous studies focused on how to stop this deadly disease in its tracks how close are we to finding more effective treatments how far has cancer research come the world health organization who note that worldwide nearly 1 in 6 deaths are down to cancer in the united states alone the national cancer institute nci estimated 1688780 new cancer cases and 600920 cancerrelated deaths in 2017 currently the most common types of cancer treatment are chemotherapy radiotherapy tumor surgery and in the case prostate cancer and breast cancer hormonal therapy however other types of treatment are beginning to pick up steam therapies that on their own or in combination with other treatments are meant to help defeat cancer more efficiently and ideally have fewer side effects innovations in cancer treatment aim to address a set of issues that will typically face healthcare providers and patients including aggressive treatment accompanied by unwanted side effects tumor recurrence after treatment surgery or both and aggressive cancers that are resilient to widely utilized treatments below we review some of the most recent cancer research breakthroughs that give us renewed hope that better therapies and prevention strategies will soon follow suit boosting the immune systems arsenal one type of therapy that has attracted a lot of attention recently is immunotherapy which aims to reinforce our own bodies existing arsenal against foreign bodies and harmful cells our immune systems response to the spread of cancer tumors but many types of cancer cell are so dangerous because they have ways of `` duping '' the immune system either into ignoring them altogether or else into giving them a `` helping hand '' lung cancer tumor growth halved with new approach to stop cancer from spreading we may have to look at mysterious noncoding molecules a recent study suggests read now therefore some types of aggressive cancer are able to spread more easily and become resistant to chemotherapy or radiotherapy however thanks to in vitro and in vivo experiments researchers are now learning how they might be able to `` deactivate '' the cancer cells protective systems a study published last year in nature immunology found that macrophages or white blood cells that are normally tasked with `` eating up '' cellular debris and other harmful foreign `` objects '' failed to obliterate the superaggressive cancer cells that was because in their interaction with the cancer cells the macrophages read not one but two signals meant to repel their `` cleansing '' action this knowledge however also showed the scientists the way forward by blocking the two relevant signaling pathways they reenabled the white blood cells to do their work therapeutic viruses and innovative vaccines a surprising weapon in the fight against cancer could be therapeutic viruses as revealed by a team from the united kingdom earlier this year in their experiments they managed to use a reovirus to attack brain cancer cells while leaving healthy cells alone '' this is the first time it has been shown that a therapeutic virus is able to pass through the brainblood barrier '' explained the study authors which `` opens up the possibility that this type of immunotherapy could be used to treat more people with aggressive brain cancers '' another area for improvement in immunotherapy is `` dendritic vaccines '' a strategy wherein dendritic cells which play a key role in the bodys immune response are collected from a persons body `` armed '' with tumorspecific antigens which will teach them to `` hunt '' and destroy relevant cancer cells and injected back into the body to boost the immune system in a new study researchers in switzerland identified a way to improve the action of these dendritic vaccines by creating artificial receptors able to recognize and `` abduct '' tiny vesicles that have been linked to cancer tumors spread in the body by attaching these artificial receptors to the dendritic cells in the `` vaccines '' the therapeutic cells are enabled to recognize harmful cancer cells with more accuracy importantly recent studies have shown that immunotherapy may work best if delivered in tandem with chemotherapy specifically if the chemotherapy drugs are delivered first and they are followed up with immunotherapy but this approach does have some pitfalls it is difficult to control the effects of this combined method so sometimes healthy tissue may be attacked alongside cancer tumors however scientists from two institutions in north carolina have developed a substance that once injected into the body becomes gellike a `` bioresponsive scaffold system '' the scaffold can hold both chemotherapy and immunotherapy drugs at once releasing them systematically into primary tumors this method allows for a better control of both therapies ensuring that the drugs act on the targeted tumor alone the nanoparticle revolution speaking of specially developed tools for delivering drugs straight to the tumor and hunting down micro tumors with accuracy and efficiency the past couple of years have seen a `` boom '' in nanotechnology and nanoparticle developments for cancer treatments nanoparticles could be a gamechanger in cancer treatment nanoparticles are microscopic particles that have garnered so much attention in clinical research among other fields because they bring us the chance to develop precise less invasive methods of tackling disease vitally they can target cancer cells or cancer tumors without harming healthy cells in the surrounding environment some nanoparticles have now been created to provide very focused hyperthermic treatment which is a type of therapy that uses hot temperatures to make cancer tumors shrink last year scientists from china and the uk managed to come up with a type of `` selfregulating '' nanoparticle that was able to expose tumors to heat while avoiding contact with healthy tissue '' this could potentially be a gamechanger in the way we treat people who have cancer '' said one of the researchers in charge of this project these tiny vehicles can also be used to target cancer stemlike cells which are undifferentiated cells that have been linked to the resilience of certain types of cancer in the face of traditional treatments such as chemotherapy thus nanoparticles can be `` loaded '' with drugs and set to `` hunt down '' cancer stem cells to prevent the growth or recurrence of tumors scientists have experimented with drugfilled nanoparticles in the treatment of various types of cancer including breast cancer and endometrial cancer no less importantly minuscule vehicles called `` nanoprobes '' can be used to detect the presence of micrometastases which are secondary tumors so tiny that they can not be seen using traditional methods dr steven k libutti director of the rutgers cancer institute of new jersey in new brunswick calls micrometastases `` the achilles heel of surgical management for cancer '' and argues that nanoprobes `` go a long way to solving such problems '' tumor starvation strategies another type of strategy that researchers have been investigating of late is that of `` starving '' tumors of the nutrients they need to grow and spread this scientists point out could be a saving grace in the case of aggressive resilient cancers that can not effectively be eradicated otherwise one novel method of attacking cancer is by starving cancer cells to death three different studies whose results were all published in january this year looked at ways of cutting off cancers nutritional supplies one of these studies looked at ways of stopping glutamine a naturally occurring amino acid from feeding cancer cells certain cancers such as breast lung and colon are known to use this amino acid to support their growth by blocking cancer cells access to glutamine the researchers managed to maximize the impact of oxidative stress a process that eventually induces cell death on these cells some aggressive types of breast cancer may be halted by stopping the cells from `` feeding '' on a particular enzyme that helps them to produce the energy they need to thrive another way of depleting cancer cells of energy is by blocking their access to vitamin b2 as researchers from the university of salford in the uk have observed as one study author says `` this is hopefully the beginning of an alternative approach to halting cancer stem cells '' this strategy could help individuals receiving cancer treatment to avoid the toxic side effects of chemotherapy cancer treatments and epigenetics epigenetics refers to the changes caused in our bodies by alterations in gene expression which dictate whether certain characteristics appear or if certain `` actions '' are affected at a biological level according to research that addressed the impact of such changes many cancers as well as the behaviors of cancer cells are determined by epigenetic factors '' recent advances in the field of epigenetics have shown that human cancer cells harbor global epigenetic abnormalities in addition to numerous genetic alterations '' '' these genetic and epigenetic alterations interact at all stages of cancer development working together to promote cancer progression '' thus it is crucial for specialists to understand when and where to intervene and the expression of which genes they may need to switch on or off depending on their role in the development of cancer one study for instance found that the gene responsible for the advent of huntingtons disease produces a set of molecules whose action may actually prevent cancer from occurring now the researchers challenge is to channel the therapeutic potential of this process without triggering huntingtons disease however the scientists are hopeful '' we believe a shortterm treatment cancer therapy for a few weeks might be possible '' says the studys senior author another recent study was able to establish that estrogenreceptor positive breast cancers that become resistant to chemotherapy gain their resilience through genetic mutations that `` confer a metastatic advantage to the tumor '' but this knowledge also gave researchers the `` break '' that they needed to come up with an improved treatment for such stubborn tumors a combination therapy that delivers the chemotherapeutic drug fulvestrant alongside an experimental enzyme inhibitor what does this all mean cancer research is running at full speed taking advantage of all the technological advances that science has achieved over recent years but what does that mean in terms of coming up with a cure for cancer whether or not there will ever be a cure for all cancer types is currently a matter of strong debate although promising studies are published and covered by the media almost every day cancer types vary immensely this makes it very difficult to say that an approach that works for one type will be adaptable to all also while there is much emerging research promising more effective treatments most of these projects are still in their early stages having conducted in vitro and in vivo experiments some potential treatments still have a long way to go before clinical trials in human patients still that doesnt mean we should lose all hope some researchers explain that these efforts should make us optimistic while we may not be at the stage where we can claim that cancer can easily be eradicated our furthered knowledge and ever more precise tools keep us ahead of the game and improve our odds in the fight against this diseasenew research published in the journal aging finds a compound that stops cancer cells from spreading by starving them of vitamin b2 the findings may revolutionize traditional chemotherapy current chemotherapy has a wide range of serious side effects but that may be about to change suggests new research a team of britishbased researchers set out to find a nontoxic therapeutic agent that targets the mitochondria of cancer cells mitochondria are energyproducing organelles found inside each cell the compound recently found by the scientists can stop cancer stemlike cells from proliferating by interfering with their energycreating process inside the mitochondria the team was led by prof michael lisanti the chair of translational medicine at the university of salford in the united kingdom and the new study can be accessed here starving cancer cells of energy prof lisanti and his colleagues used drugscreening to identify the compound which is called diphenyleneiodonium chloride dpi as the researchers explain various cell assays and other cell culture experiments revealed that dpi reduced over 90 percent of the energy produced in the cells mitochondria dpi achieved this by blocking vitamin b2 also known as riboflavin which depleted the cells of energy '' our observation is that dpi is selectively attacking the cancer stem cells by effectively creating a vitamin deficiency in other words by turning off energy production in cancer stem cells we are creating a process of hibernation '' prof michael lisanti the cancer stem cells are the ones that produce the tumor `` its extraordinary '' continues prof lisanti `` the cells just sit there as if in a state of suspended animation '' importantly dpi proved to be nontoxic for socalled `` bulk '' cancer cells which are largely thought to be nontumorigenic is chemo at the heart of cancer regrowth paradoxically the very treatment that is supposed to stop cancer from spreading sometimes enables it to do so read now this suggests that the compound might be successful where current chemotherapy fails the team explains `` dpi treatment can be used to acutely confer a mitochondrialdeficient phenotype which we show effectively depletes cancer stemlike cells from the heterogeneous cancer cell population '' '' these findings have significant therapeutic implications for potently targeting cancer stemlike cells while minimizing toxic side effects '' they add a new era of chemotherapy '' we believe '' say the scientists `` that dpi is one of the most potent and highly selective cancer stemlike cells inhibitors discovered to date '' the findings are particularly significant given the dire need for nontoxic cancer therapies and the serious side effects of conventional chemotherapy '' the beauty of dpi is that it makes the cancer stem cells metabolically inflexible so that they will be highly susceptible to many other drugs '' explains prof lisanti study coauthor prof federica sotgia also comments on the significance of the recent findings saying `` in terms of chemotherapies for cancer we clearly need something better than what we have at present and this is hopefully the beginning of an alternative approach to halting cancer stem cells '' in fact the authors specialize in finding alternative nontoxic therapies and they hope that their most recent findings will mark the beginning of a new era of chemotherapy perhaps one that uses nontoxic molecules to target the mitochondrial activity of cancer stemlike cells the researchers propose to call these new molecules `` mitoflavoscins ''periods usually arrive once each month but the exact date flow cramp severity and accompanying symptoms are not quite that consistent for this very reason the app market is flooded with period trackers that aim to offer insight into your monthly cycle period tracking apps can help you to learn more about your cycle and plan for future periods bleeding occurs every 28 days for the majority of women but it is common for the menstrual cycle to be either shorter or longer in duration and for bleeding to start anywhere from day 21 to day 40 period length may also vary and last for 3–8 days with an average of 5 days bleeding is often heaviest on days 1 and 2 and starts to become lighter thereafter tracking your period can be useful for several reasons period tracking can help you to get to know your own body and cycle and observe any symptoms such as mood swings or headaches that may occur during a particular phase of your cycle period tracking can help to identify any changes to your menstrual cycle that may be an indicator of potential health issues furthermore using period tracking apps can tell you when you are likely to be most fertile if you are avoiding pregnancy or trying to become pregnant there are hundreds of apps that track and analyze the menstrual cycle so how do you know which one is the best fit for you medical news today have tried and tested apps galore to bring you a selection of the top 10 apps to start tracking your period today period calendar android free iphone free period calendar can help to track and predict your period plus provide information on your fertile window and potential ovulation date in addition to the basic menstrual cycle tracking function the app can be used to record temperature intercourse birth control weight cervical mucus mood and any other symptoms the pill reminder ensures that you will never forget a dose ever again whether you need to remember to take medications supplements birth control pills or even an injection the pill tracker can be set up to remind you flo period tracker android free iphone free if you are wondering when you last had a period or would like to know when your next one is due you can easily find out using flo flo uses machine learning to accurately and reliably predict menstruation and ovulation using the apps bold and simple calendar you will be able to log how you are feeling your symptoms sex drive and menstruation flow the app can also be used to track sleep water consumption and physical activity the insights dashboard helps you to learn more about your body and cycle and it also provides personalized health insights each day clue android free iphone free clue has been ranked as the top period and ovulation tracking app by the obstetrics gynecology journal which is a publication of the american college of obstetricians and gynecologists clue uses science to help its users to identify unique patterns in their menstrual cycle with the apps period tracker multiple mood trackers health logs and exercise trackers your health and menstrual cycle will no longer be a mystery the developers promise to be inclusive of all ages and never use butterflies flowers euphemisms or pink the apps unique algorithm learns from the data that you add which means that the more you use clue the smarter it will become my calendar android free iphone free my calendar is a sophisticated elegant and very customizable period tracker it can help those with irregular cycles as well as people who have worries about conceiving birth control and contraception with my calendar you can track regular and irregular periods temperature weight moods symptoms and blood flow with its discreet reminders you can be prepared for approaching periods along with ovulation and fertile days you can access all your essential information using the health tracker at a glance and the calendar can be passwordprotected to ensure that your information remains private glow android free iphone free glow can track your period and record your symptoms mood sexual activity and medications glows datadriven menstrual and ovulation calculator helps women to take control of their reproductive health the app can forecast periods and ovulation and its predictions become smarter over time not only can the app help women who are avoiding or attempting pregnancy but it also helps those who are undergoing fertility treatments such as intrauterine insemination and in vitro fertilization you can make charts of your menstrual and fertility data set medication birth control and ovulation reminders as well as log more than 40 different health signals glow also offers a subscription to unlock comparative insights premium articles private messaging and premium support eve android free iphone free eve is a savvy period tracker that predicts upcoming periods and your chances of pregnancy discover trends in your cycle by logging your moods and symptoms and view your health data in eyecatching charts with eve you can review past periods forecast future periods and ovulation and visualize your cycle history in a new way with eves interactive staircase the app provides access to a community where you can discuss periods sex and health if you are concerned about anything at all ask the community no subject is off limits and you can learn from those who have had similar experiences period tracker lite android free iphone free the period tracker lite app makes logging menstrual cycles quick and easy press a button at the start of each period and period tracker lite will record your data and use the average of 3 months worth of data to calculate your next period take notes each day about your symptoms such as flow cramps bloating backache headache and tender breasts your weight temperature and a choice of more than 30 moods can also be selected period dates fertility days and ovulation are all shown in a simple monthview calendar the app provides comprehensive charts that illustrate weight changes temperature period length cycle length and symptoms period plus iphone free period plus can help you to keep in touch with the duration of your menstrual cycles and tells you when the next one will begin the app sends you reminders of your next period and fertile window helping you to get to know your cycle and plan ahead with birth control pregnancy planning and even vacations period plus tracks period duration and intensity cramp intensity breast tenderness breakouts migraines basal body temperature cervical mucus sexual activity exercise pregnancy test results sleep patterns and more my cycles android free iphone free regardless of whether you are trying to conceive or become an expert on when your next period is due my cycles can help my cycles tracks periods in a handy calendar and predicts future ones wherever you are you can track your period symptoms mood and medications with my cycles in an instant record your periods view them at a glance with the easytoread calendar and plan periods fertile days and ovulation for the next 12 months if you are trying to get pregnant the app lets you know when your chances of conceiving are higher with helpful reminders likewise it tells you when to use extra protection if you are not trying to conceive cycles iphone free the cycles app is a simple period and fertility tracker that requires little input irrespective of having regular or irregular periods with cycles all you need to do is turn the dial on the first day of your period and thats it the app automatically adjusts your cycle length cycles is designed so that you can invite your partner to the app to keep up with your cycle this feature is useful so that your partner can provide emotional support plan trips and romantic evenings and know when your most fertile days are if you are trying to conceive the app uses scientifically backed fertility tracking that predicts fertility with an accuracy of up to 95 percent optional password protection keeps your information secure from prying eyes seven tips for relieving period bloating here are some tips about how to relieve periodrelating bloating read nowwant to get fit this year but dont know where to start we have chosen the best fitness blogs to empower you and help to get you started on your journey to tiptop physical fitness fitness blogs aim to inspire empower and motivate you to reach your health and fitness goals getting up off the couch and taking part in regular physical activity is one of the most important things you can do to ensure you remain healthy regular exercise can help to control your weight strengthen your bones and muscles and reduce your risk of cardiovascular disease type 2 diabetes and some cancers furthermore being active improves your mood mental health mobility and ability to complete tasks as an older adult as well as increases your chances of living longer adults are recommended to do at least 150 minutes of moderateintensity physical activity each week to achieve substantial health benefits and increase to 300 minutes for more extensive benefits if you are stuck on where to begin or are worried about getting injured the good news is that aerobic activity such as brisk walking is considered to be safe for most people hundreds of fitness blogs are also available to help you on your way and provide tips ideas and information on the best types of activity to boost fitness and instructions on how to do them medical news today have trawled through the many fitness blogs out there to bring you the top 10 fitness blogs for 2018 myfitnesspal blog myfitnesspal is a smartphone app and website that records physical activity and diet the app works out the optimal intake of calories and nutrients for the user to accomplish their goals and it uses elements of gaming to motivate them myfitnesspals blog focuses on providing easytoread information on eating psychology nutrition weight loss fitness inspiration workout guides and motivational support through the victory stories on the blog fitness posts include seven tips to lift weights without causing injury songs that should feature on your 2018 running playlist and brain and bodyboosting moves that you should add to your next walk visit the myfitnesspal blog natalie jill fitness natalie jill fitness was founded after natalie jill gained weight straight after losing her house retiring and ending her marriage she turned her life around and in the process became an inspiration to others natalie specializes in fitness weight loss healthy lifestyles and body weight training natalie coaches motivates and empowers people to stop making excuses and instead make solutions to become the best version of themselves recent posts on her blog include a bootybuilding workout to activate your glutes an upper body workout using just your body weight and how to do a chin up visit the natalie jill fitness blog ace ace is an acronym for the american council on exercise ace are a nonprofit organization that certifiy exercise professionals and health coaches aces vision is to get people moving and provide scientifically backed education to fitness professionals and health enthusiasts to make an impact on preventable diseases related to inactivity by 2035 their expert articles cover fitness topics such as exercises to improve agility lower body exercises to complete instead of doing squats and the many types of strength and their benefits visit the ace blog born fitness adam bornstein developed born fitness with the aim of taking the stress out of health nutrition and fitness whether you hope to lose weight gain muscle eat more healthfully or live longer born fitness provide solutions to fit your needs the born fitness team will help you to identify the diets strategies exercises and workouts that are best suited to you so that you can apply them to your life achieve your goals and live stronger and longer activities are available on the blog to suit all levels of fitness from beginner to advanced training posts include how to incorporate resistance bands into your routine preventing knee back and shoulder injuries during your workouts and the truth about the 7minute workout visit the born fitness blog the fitnessista the fitnessista is a healthy lifestyle blog written by gina harney who is a fitness instructor personal trainer and weight loss specialist based in san diego ca gina is a mom of two and she shares snippets of her family life on the blog along with quick effective workouts and healthful recipes that are super speedy to put together the latest posts on the fitnessista include things to help with fitness motivation the barre hiit workout that you can practice anywhere and a strength and cardio workout that can be completed on a park bench visit the fitnessista blog suzanne bowen fitness suzanne bowen compiled all of the training that she had received and given over the course of 16 years and created suzanne bowen fitness suzanne is also the creator of barreamped which is an internationally taught barre fitness technique regardless of whether you havent exercised for a while or if you are a seasoned expert suzanne has workouts that range from 10 minutes to over an hour that are effective for everyone the blog provides challenges and workouts to boost your fitness levels such as the crunchless abs workout a light weight routine for the upper body and a rebounding workout and its benefits visit the suzanne bowen fitness blog knockedup fitness erica ziel is a mother of three and the founder of knockedup fitness erica is a personal trainer and expert for fitnessinfused pilates with more than 10 years experience training numerous clients erica is an expert in prenatal and postnatal training and teaching women how to strengthen their core muscles for an easier pregnancy delivery and recovery the knockedup fitness blog delivers real and relevant topics to the busy mom or momtobe with articles such as why its important to properly strengthen your core how to prevent and relieve back pain during pregnancy and how movement can prepare your body for birth visit the knockedup fitness blog lisa gulley established workout mommy in 2007 to provide health and fitness information for moms lisa says that as a mom of four boys she is fully aware of how being a mom requires you to look after someone other than yourself 247 and that finding the time to exercise is a challenge lisa aims to provide the inspiration motivation and ideas you need to fit fitness exercise and health into your busy schedule and keep your sanity in check posts on workout mommy include ways to overcome a negative mindset tips on how to start a fitness routine and the types of cardio exercises that are best for women visit the workout mommy blog love sweat fitness katie dunlop is a certified personal trainer group fitness instructor and the creator of love sweat fitness she started love sweat fitness with the aim of inspiring women all over the world to find their happy and healthy body after college katie found herself overweight by 45 pounds and was fed up with trendy workouts and fad diets she decided to take her fitness and health into her own hands lost her excess weight and identified her true passion for helping women to reach their goals inspiring posts on katies blog include ways to make your morning workout the best part of your day five tips for a happier and healthier you this year and how to train for a 10k run visit the love sweat fitness blog nerd fitness nerd fitness say that they are a community of misfits mutants and underdogs that are ready to help you on your fitness journey whether you are overweight and frustrated in danger of serious health issues want to become a healthier parent or just want to look after or feel better about yourself nerd fitness aim to help you to make small changes so that you can live a happier healthier and more fulfilling life blog posts include the main differences between weight loss success and failure the number of calories you burn while walking and how to get strong like logan with the wolverine workout visit the nerd fitness blog the 10 best fitness apps pair these blogs with the apps listed here to boost your chances of becoming fit and healthy read nowa new study may have revealed a possible new prevention and treatment strategy for osteoarthritis which is one of the most common and debilitating agerelated diseases in the united states researchers suggest that increasing levels of foxo proteins could be one way to prevent and treat osteoarthritis researchers at the scripps research institute tsri in san diego ca reveal that proteins called foxo are key for joint health by boosting the levels of these foxo proteins they believe that it might be possible to treat osteoarthritis or even stop the disease from developing senior study author dr martin lotz from the department of molecular medicine at tsri and his team recently reported their results in the journal science translational medicine osteoarthritis also referred to as degenerative joint disease is estimated to affect more than 30 million adults in the united states making it the most common type of arthritis the condition is characterized by a breakdown of cartilage which is the tissue that cushions the joints of the bones osteoarthritis most commonly affects the knee hip and hand joints in a previous study dr lotz and team found that foxo levels in joint cartilage are reduced for this latest study the researchers sought to find out more about how foxo proteins affect joint health the effects of foxo deficiency in mice the researchers reached their findings by studying mice that were lacking foxo proteins in their joint cartilage compared with control mice the scientists found that foxodeficient mice experienced degeneration of the joints at a significantly younger age what is more the rodents with foxo deficiency showed greater susceptibility to cartilage damage during a treadmill test and they were also more likely to develop posttraumatic osteoarthritis due to knee injury osteoarthritis could this algae extract lead to a cure researchers reveal how an algae extract may offer a cure for osteoarthritis read now upon further investigation the scientists found that the foxodeficient mice showed abnormalities in a process called autophagy which is a natural process by which cells get rid of any unwanted or damaged components in order to maintain their health and carry out any repairs foxo deficiency also led to abnormalities in the processes that protect our cells against damage caused by free radicals additionally the study revealed that mice lacking foxo proteins failed to produce the required levels of a protein called lubricin which helps to protect joint cartilage against wear and tear the reduced production of lubricin was linked to a reduction in healthy cells in the `` superficial zone '' which is a layer of cartilage in the knee joint boosting foxo may prevent osteoarthritis so why does foxo cause these issues the researchers found that foxo proteins regulate the expression of genes that are important for joint health including those that control inflammation and autophagy the absence of foxo proteins in the joint cartilage leads to an increase in inflammation and a decrease in autophagy meaning that cells are unable to repair any damage '' the housekeeping mechanisms which keep cells healthy were not working in these knockout mice '' says dr lotz for the final part of their study the scientists wanted to see whether boosting foxo levels could restore these `` housekeeping mechanisms '' by increasing foxo expression in cells taken from people with osteoarthritis the researchers were able to normalize the expression of genes associated with inflammation and autophagy and the production of lubricin was also restored the team now plans to create molecules that can increase foxo levels and assess their effects in experimental osteoarthritis models '' drugs that boost the expression and activity of foxo could be a strategy for preventing and treating osteoarthritis '' dr martin lotzaccording to the national institutes of health people have used marijuana or cannabis to treat their ailments for at least 3000 years however the food and drug administration have not deemed marijuana safe or effective in the treatment of any medical condition although cannabidiol a substance that is present in marijuana received approval in june 2018 as a treatment for some types of epilepsy marijuana is being increasingly legalized in the us but is it safe this tension between a widespread belief that marijuana is an effective treatment for a wide assortment of ailments and a lack of scientific knowledge on its effects has been somewhat exacerbated in recent times by a drive toward legalization twentynine states plus the district of columbia have now made marijuana available for medical and in some states recreational purposes a recent study published in the journal addiction also found that use of marijuana is increasing sharply across the united states although this rise may not be linked to the legalization of marijuana in participating states nevertheless this rise in use is prompting major public health concerns in this article we look at the scientific evidence weighing the medical benefits of marijuana against its associated health risks in an attempt to answer this simple question is marijuana good or bad what are the medical benefits of marijuana over the years research has yielded results to suggest that marijuana may be of benefit in the treatment of some conditions these are listed below chronic pain last year a large review from the national academies of sciences engineering and medicine assessed more than 10000 scientific studies on the medical benefits and adverse effects of marijuana one area that the report looked closely at was the use of medical marijuana to treat chronic pain chronic pain is a leading cause of disability affecting more than 25 million adults in the us the review found that marijuana or products containing cannabinoids which are the active ingredients in marijuana or other compounds that act on the same receptors in the brain as marijuana are effective at relieving chronic pain alcoholism and drug addiction another comprehensive review of evidence published last year in the journal clinical psychology review revealed that using marijuana may help people with alcohol or opioid dependencies to fight their addictions but this finding may be contentious the national academies of sciences review suggests that marijuana use actually drives increased risk for abusing and becoming dependent on other substances also the more that someone uses marijuana the more likely they are to develop a problem with using marijuana individuals who began using the drug at a young age are also known to be at increased risk of developing a problem with marijuana use depression posttraumatic stress disorder and social anxiety the review published in clinical psychology review assessed all published scientific literature that investigated the use of marijuana to treat symptoms of mental illness evidence to date suggests that marijuana could help to treat some mental health conditions its authors found some evidence supporting the use of marijuana to relieve depression and posttraumatic stress disorder symptoms that being said they caution that marijuana is not an appropriate treatment for some other mental health conditions such as bipolar disorder and psychosis the review indicates that there is some evidence to suggest that marijuana might alleviate symptoms of social anxiety but again this is contradicted by the national academies of sciences engineering and medicine review which instead found that regular users of marijuana may actually be at increased risk of social anxiety cancer evidence suggests that oral cannabinoids are effective against nausea and vomiting caused by chemotherapy and some small studies have found that smoked marijuana may also help to alleviate these symptoms alcohol more damaging to brain health than marijuana a recent study suggests that alcohol may cause more harm to the brain than marijuana read now some studies on cancer cells suggest that cannabinoids may either slow down the growth of or kill some types of cancer however early studies that tested this hypothesis in humans revealed that although cannabinoids are a safe treatment they are not effective at controlling or curing cancer multiple sclerosis the shortterm use of oral cannabinoids may improve symptoms of spasticity among people with multiple sclerosis but the positive effects have been found to be modest epilepsy in june 2018 the food and drug administration fda approved the use of a medication containing cannabidiol cbd to treat two rare severe and specific types of epilepsy called lennoxgastaut syndrome and dravet syndrome that are difficult to control with other types of medication this cbdbased drug is known as epidiolex cbd is one of many substances that occurs in cannabis it is not psychoactive the drug for treating these conditions involves a purified form of cbd the approval was based on the findings of research and clinical trials a study published in 2017 found that the use of cbd resulted in far fewer seizures among children with dravet syndrome compared with a placebo dravet syndrome seizures are prolonged repetitive and potentially lethal in fact 1 in 5 children with dravet syndrome do not reach the age of 20 years in the study 120 children and teenagers with dravet syndrome all of whom were aged between 2 and 18 were randomly assigned to receive an oral cbd solution or a placebo for 14 weeks along with their usual medication the researchers found that the children who received the cbd solution went from having around 12 seizures per month to an average of six seizures per month three children receiving cbd did not experience any seizures at all children who received the placebo also saw a reduction in seizures but this was slight their average number of seizures went down from 15 each month before the study to 14 seizures per month during the study the researchers say that this 39 percent reduction in seizure occurrence provides strong evidence that the compound can help people living with dravet syndrome and that their paper has the first rigorous scientific data to demonstrate this however the study also found a high rate of side effects linked to cbd more than 9 in 10 of the children treated with cbd experienced side effects most commonly vomiting fatigue and fever the patient information leaflet for epidiolex warns of side effects such as liver damage sedation and thoughts of suicide what are the health risks of marijuana at the other end of the spectrum is the plethora of studies that have found negative associations between marijuana use and health they are listed below mental health problems daily marijuana use is believed to exacerbate existing symptoms of bipolar disorder among people who have this mental health problem however the national academies of sciences engineering and medicine report suggests that among people with no history of the condition there is only limited evidence of a link between marijuana use and developing bipolar disorder moderate evidence suggests that regular marijuana users are more likely to experience suicidal thoughts and there is a small increased risk of depression among marijuana users marijuana use is likely to increase risk of psychosis including schizophrenia but a curious finding among people with schizophrenia and other psychoses is that a history of marijuana use is linked with improved performance on tests assessing learning and memory testicular cancer although there is no evidence to suggest any link between using marijuana and an increased risk for most cancers the national academies of sciences did find some evidence to suggest an increased risk for the slowgrowing seminoma subtype of testicular cancer respiratory disease regular marijuana smoking is linked to increased risk of chronic cough but `` it is unclear '' whether smoking marijuana worsens lung function or increases the risk of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or asthma a 2014 study that explored the relationship between marijuana use and lung disease suggested that it was plausible that smoking marijuana could contribute to lung cancer though it has been difficult to conclusively link the two the authors of that study published in the journal current opinion in pulmonary medicine conclude '' there is unequivocal evidence that habitual or regular marijuana smoking is not harmless a caution against regular heavy marijuana usage is prudent '' '' the medicinal use of marijuana is likely not harmful to lungs in low cumulative doses '' they add `` but the dose limit needs to be defined recreational use is not the same as medicinal use and should be discouraged '' so is marijuana good or bad for your health there is evidence that demonstrates both the harms and health benefits of marijuana yet despite the emergence over the past couple of years of very comprehensive uptodate reviews of the scientific studies evaluating the benefits and harms of the drug its clear that more research is needed to fully determine the public health implications of rising marijuana use more research is needed to confirm the harms and benefits of marijuana use many scientists and health bodies including the american cancer society acs support the need for further scientific research on the use of marijuana and cannabinoids to treat medical conditions however there is an obstacle to this marijuana is classed as a schedule i controlled substance by the drug enforcement administration which deters the study of marijuana and cannabinoids through its imposition of strict conditions on the researchers working in this area if you happen to live in a state where medical use of marijuana is legal you and your doctor will need to carefully consider these factors and how they relate to your illness and health history before using this drug for instance while there is some evidence to support the use for marijuana for pain relief you should certainly avoid marijuana if you have a history of mental health problems remember to always speak to your doctor before taking a new medicinewith so many diet types to choose from how do we know which one will suit us best one problem that may face us is deciding whether to go lowfat or lowcarb what does research have to say about it one of the most difficult decisions when it comes to weight loss diets is picking one that will work well for you keto diets mediterranean diets fasting diets there are so many options out there for people who want to lose weight however choosing a diet is tricky how do we know which one will work best for us or if the diet will work at all researchers at the stanford university school of medicine in california have recently conducted a study exploring one key aspect of this `` best diet '' question whether lowfat or lowcarb diets are more effective what lead study author prof christopher gardner and colleagues found however might only make the matter more complicated '' weve all heard stories '' says prof gardner `` of a friend who went on one diet it worked great and then another friend tried the same diet and it didnt work at all its because were all very different and were just starting to understand the reasons for this diversity '' '' maybe we shouldnt be asking whats the best diet but whats the best diet for whom '' prof christopher gardner prof gardner and team worked with 609 people aged 18–50 with an almost 5050 maletofemale ratio the participants were split into two groups and randomly assigned one of two diets lowcarb or lowfat all of the study participants followed their assigned diet for a full year the results of the researchers study are now published in the journal jama opt for natural foods in order to gain a better understanding of the factors that might drive weight gain and weight loss prof gardner and team also sequenced the participants genomes in doing so they looked for gene patterns that they could associate with the effectiveness fat or carb metabolism another test measured all the subjects insulin levels which have previously been associated with weight gain in some people cant keep the weight off this may be why why are our bodies so stubborn when it comes to weight management a new study sheds light read now for the first 8 weeks of their respective diets the participants were instructed to consume no more than 20 grams of either fats or carbs per day this the authors explain would be the equivalent of one and a half slices of wholewheat bread for carbs or a large handful of nuts in the case of fats from the second month of their diet onward the participants were allowed to make adjustments as needed adding back 5 –15 grams of either carbs or fat little by little the purpose of these adjustments was to encourage the participants to strike a nutritional balance that they would be comfortable adhering to in the long run beyond the `` confines '' of the study '' we wanted them to choose '' says prof gardner `` a lowfat or lowcarb diet plan that they could potentially follow forever rather than a diet that theyd drop when the study ended '' as the year drew to a close those who had been following a lowfat diet had a daily fat intake of 57 grams on average compared with 87 grams per day before the start of the study those on a lowcarb diet had a daily carb intake of approximately 132 grams versus 247 grams before the study started participants lost an average of 13 pounds over the 1year period the scientists were pleased with the impact that the study had on the participants dietary health stressing that one of its main achievements was to encourage them to switch to healthful sources of fats and carbs '' we made sure to tell everybody '' adds prof gardner `` regardless of which diet they were on to go to the farmers market and dont buy processed convenience food also we advised them to diet in a way that didnt make them feel hungry or deprived '' study opens the door to further questions after measuring participants baseline insulin levels and weight loss progress throughout the study the researchers saw that although they had all transitioned to more healthful eating habits there was still a lot of individual variance when it came to weight loss thus while some participants lost more than 60 pounds others gained 15–20 pounds however the researchers were unable to find any links between gene patterns or insulin output and a persons likelihood of thriving on a lowfat versus lowcarb diet '' this study closes the door on some questions but it opens the door to others we have gobs of data that we can use in secondary exploratory studies '' prof gardner notes the researchers next step from here therefore will be to look at all the different data collected throughout the current study and try to understand how individual dietary needs might be calculated in the future '' i still think there is an opportunity to discover some personalization to it now we just need to work on tying the pieces together '' says prof gardner in the meantime the researchers encourage people on a weight loss journey to just be more mindful about what they eat since that will be the first step to a more healthful lifestyle '' on both sides referring to lowcarb and lowfat dieters we heard from people who had lost the most weight that we had helped them change their relationship to food and that now they were more thoughtful about how they ate '' prof gardner concludesintermittent fasting has been gaining popularity among people looking to shed extra kilograms and maintain a healthy weight researchers argue that this type of diet may also slow down aging and disease intermittent fasting can help with weight management but might it also bring other health benefits in intermittent fasting what essentially takes place in the body is that one source of energy which can facilitate the accumulation of body fat is switched for another our bodies run on glucose or simple sugar but when we fast for a longer period of time that energy source becomes unavailable our system needs to identify a different kind of `` fuel '' that is when the body begins to convert certain types of body fat into fatty acids which are easily absorbed by the blood fatty acids in turn produce molecules called ketones which the body uses as its new source of energy stephen anton a researcher at the university of florida college of medicine in gainesville calls this process `` flipping the metabolic switch '' '' this switch '' explains anton `` can happen after a certain period of time fasting its a gradation in which your metabolism over time shifts to use higher and higher amounts of ketones for energy '' he and his team were interested to learn more about how this switch occurs and whether it could bring other health benefits alongside weight management for this purpose they reviewed numerous recent studies focused on the mechanisms and benefits of intermittent fasting the teams review published in the journal obesity suggests that intermittent fasting may be more healthful than other dieting strategies as ketones put less stress on cells than the byproducts of other dieting styles significant weight loss regardless of style anton and his colleagues explain that the switch usually begins to take place after 8–12 hours of fasting though in the case of individuals who practice intermittent fasting the fasting strategies vary the researchers focused on the two most common types of intermittent fasting diets the first of which is based on time restrictions for eating in it the dieter may fast for a number of hours per day for instance 16 hours while allowing themselves to eat anything theyd like over the remaining hours how intermittent fasting can increase weight loss how does intermittent fasting work read now for the second type of intermittent fasting dieters may choose to alternate days of total fasting with days when no food is off limits or they may simply alternate days of frugal eating when individuals limit themselves to foods that equal only about 500 calories in all with days of unrestricted eating or `` feasting days '' `` of course '' anton notes `` we recommend healthy food during the feasting times '' the teams review of existing studies revealed that all in all any type of intermittent fasting diets are associated with significant weight loss in all 10 clinical trials assessing the effects of alternateday fasting the results conclusively pointed to this strategys effectiveness when it came to shedding extra kilos and 3 out of the 4 studies focused on the restricted timing type of intermittent fasting had similar results '' so in my mind its not a question of whether it works for producing fat loss '' says anton whats more interesting and more important is what kind of tissue is lost through intermittent fasting additional potential health benefits most of the studies reviewed by anton and team revealed that while participants did lose body fat no significant amount of lean tissue which includes organ tissue muscular tissue and bone tissue was lost this is important since lean tissue allows our bodies to keep on functioning well and other types of dieting strategies anton notes lead to significant loss of both fat and lean tissue which may affect health in the long run studies into the effect of the switch from glucosedriven energy to ketonedriven energy in rodents and other animals suggests that intermittent fasting could also have other health benefits the scientists say the researchers say that it could help to prolong the lifespan improve the functioning of metabolic processes protect cognitive function enhance physical performance reduce harmful instances of inflammation and shield against cardiovascular diseases '' an important takeaway is that we all have the ability to switch our metabolism from glucose to ketone utilization and that switch has the potential to have profound health benefits for us in addition to the positive changes in body composition '' stephen anton still the authors warn against starting intermittent fasting without first asking for a doctors advice this dieting style may not be equally beneficial for everyone and in some cases it could do more harm than good he cautionsemerging evidence suggests that a `` potent '' drug could prevent the development of alzheimers disease but only if a person takes the medication long before symptoms of this condition make an appearance an existing drug may be able to stop alzheimers onset researchers say alzheimers disease is the most common form of dementia according to the centers for disease control and prevention cdc an estimated 57 million adults in the united states live with this condition unfortunately there is no cure for alzheimers and following disease onset symptoms tend to worsen progressively then the question `` can specialists prevent the disease in people deemed at increased risk '' arises the authors of a new study from the university of virginia in charlottesville suggest that one drug called memantine which is currently used to manage alzheimers symptoms may actually help prevent the disease this however might only happen if a person takes the drug before symptoms set in '' based on what weve learned so far it is my opinion that we will never be able to cure alzheimers disease by treating patients once they become symptomatic '' says prof george bloom of the university of virginia who oversaw the study '' the best hope for conquering this disease is to first recognize patients who are at risk and begin treating them prophylactically with new drugs and perhaps lifestyle adjustments that would reduce the rate at which the silent phase of the disease progresses '' he says adding `` ideally we would prevent it from starting in the first place '' the journal alzheimers dementia has now published the teams findings the cell cycle reentry process the researchers explain that alzheimers disease actually begins long before symptoms start to show perhaps even a decade or longer in advance one of the conditions characteristics is that once affected by the disease brain cells attempt to divide possibly in order to balance out the death of other neurons only to die anyway in any case the further division of fully formed brain cells is unusual and does not happen in a healthy brain the affected neurons attempt at division is called the `` cell cycle reentry process '' '' its been estimated that as much as 90 percent of neuron death that occurs in the alzheimers brain follows this cell cycle reentry process which is an abnormal attempt to divide '' explains prof bloom more potent alzheimers therapy is on its way recent advances in alzheimers research are speeding up the process of designing better therapies read now '' by the end of the course of the disease the patient will have lost about 30 percent of the neurons in the frontal lobes of the brain '' he estimates study coauthor erin kodis prof blooms former doctoral student formed her own hypothesis about what triggers this mechanism excess calcium she believes enters neurons through special receptors called nmda receptors on the cells surface this drives brain cells to start dividing following a series of laboratory experiments kodis confirmed that her hypothesis was correct this mechanism is set in motion before the formation of amyloid plaques which are characteristic of alzheimers disease in the brain eventually however molecules of an amino acid called beta amyloid stick together to form toxic amyloid plaques memantine may have potent properties kodis saw that when neurons encounter beta amyloid molecules in the early stages that precede plaque buildup nmda receptors open to receive the excess calcium that ultimately leads to their destruction but then the researcher made another discovery the drug memantine prevented cell cycle reentry by closing the nmda receptors on the surface of neurons '' the experiments suggest that memantine might have potent diseasemodifying properties if it could be administered to patients long before they have become symptomatic and diagnosed with alzheimers disease '' prof george bloom '' perhaps this could prevent the disease or slow its progression long enough that the average age of symptom onset could be significantly later if it happens at all '' prof bloom adds these findings are particularly promising memantine has few known side effects and those that have been reported are rare and do not have a major impact on an individuals wellbeing prof bloom believes that in the future a useful preventive approach might be to screen people for telling signs that they are exposed to alzheimers as early as possible specialists could then prescribe memantine to those at an increased risk of the disease he says people may have to take the drug throughout their lives to keep alzheimers at bay or at least in check '' i dont want to raise false hopes '' says prof bloom however he continues `` if this idea of using memantine as a prophylactic pans out it will be because we now understand that calcium is one of the agents that gets the disease started and we may be able to stop or slow the process if done very early '' currently prof bloom and colleagues are planning a clinical trial to test the preventive strategy that they outlined in the studyfor many cancers diagnosis is a long and challenging process a new blood test however could offer a muchneeded simpler and more effective diagnostic technique called cancerseek it has the potential to identify eight cancer types from one blood sample researchers have created a blood test that could detect eight cancer types in the new study researchers reveal how the blood test demonstrated high sensitivity and specificity for cancer detection in more than 1000 people with the disease the team from the johns hopkins university school of medicine in baltimore md recently published their results in the journal science worldwide cancer remains one of the leading causes of death it is estimated that by 2030 the number of cancer deaths will have risen from 8 million to 13 million early diagnosis is key to reducing cancerrelated deaths the earlier the disease is diagnosed the higher the chances of treatment success but sadly many cancers are not caught until the later stages and this is largely due to a lack of fast and effective diagnostic tools however the johns hopkins researchers believe that cancerseek could bring us closer to a quick simple way to detect cancer in its early stages test produced high sensitivity and specificity when cancerous tumors form they release small fragments of mutated dna and proteins into the bloodstream and these can act as markers for cancer the new blood test works by identifying the markers for 16 gene mutations and eight proteins that are associated with eight different cancer types these include breast lung and colorectal cancer as well as five cancers ovarian liver stomach pancreatic and esophageal for which there are currently no routine screening tests for people at average risk '' a novelty of our classification method is that it combines the probability of observing various dna mutations together with the levels of several proteins in order to make the final call '' explains study coauthor cristian tomasetti phd an associate professor of oncology and biostatistics at johns hopkins university how gum disease could lead to cancer researchers shed light on how gum disease can fuel cancer read now for their study the researchers tested cancerseek on 1005 individuals who had been diagnosed with nonmetastatic forms of one of the eight cancers they found that the test was able to identify 70 percent of the cancers with sensitivity ranging from 33 percent for breast cancer to 98 percent for ovarian cancer sensitivity ranged from 69 percent to 98 percent for the five cancers that currently have no routine screening tests the researchers report in terms of specificity the test yielded an overall result of more than 99 percent on testing cancerseek on 812 healthy adults it only produced seven falsepositive results as study coauthor kenneth kinzler phd codirector of the ludwig center for cancer genetics and therapeutics at johns hopkins notes `` very high specificity was essential because falsepositive results can subject patients to unnecessary invasive followup tests and procedures to confirm the presence of cancer '' what is more the researchers found that their test was able to pinpoint the location of tumors for 83 percent of patients test could substantially impact patients the researchers note that larger studies will now be needed to further determine the efficacy of cancerseek as a routine screening test for cancer and such studies are in the pipeline however the team believes that the results of its current research are encouraging '' this has the potential to substantially impact patients earlier detection provides many ways to improve outcomes for patients '' says study coauthor dr anne marie lennon phd who is an associate professor of medicine surgery and radiology at johns hopkins '' optimally cancers would be detected early enough that they could be cured by surgery alone but even cancers that are not curable by surgery alone will respond better to systemic therapies when there is less advanced disease '' she adds the team hopes that cancerseek will one day offer a simple noninvasive and fast strategy for diagnosing cancer in its early stages '' this test represents the next step in changing the focus of cancer research from late stage disease to early disease which i believe will be critical to reducing cancer deaths in the longterm '' study coauthor dr bert vogelstein johns hopkins university school of medicinethey are usually marketed as a safe alternative to conventional cigarettes but a new study suggests that ecigarettes may still pose serious harm to health researchers suggest that ecigarettes may increase the risk of cancer and heart disease researchers at the new york university school of medicine in new york city found that mice exposed to electronic cigaratte ecigarette vapor experienced dna damage in the lungs bladder and heart which could increase the risk of cancer and heart disease such damage was also found in cultured human lung and bladder cells that had been exposed to ecigarette vapor for the equivalent of 10 years study coauthor moonshong tang of the department of environmental medicine at the new york university school of medicine and his colleagues recently reported their findings in the proceedings of the national academy of sciences ecigarettes also known as ecigs have soared in popularity in recent years particularly among teenagers and young adults according to the centers for disease control and prevention cdc more than 2 million middle and high school students in the united states report having used ecigarettes in the past 30 days ecigarettes are not approved by the food and drug administration fda as a quitsmoking aid after the us preventive services task force concluded that there is `` insufficient evidence to recommend for or against their use for smoking cessation '' however research has found that more than 80 percent of smokers believe that ecigarettes could help them to quit while more than 97 percent believe that the batterypowered devices can help to reduce the use of conventional tobacco the debate over ecigarette safety when it comes to our health the cdc believe that ecigarettes are not as harmful as conventional ones still because ecigarettes are relatively new to the market precisely how harmful they are remains unclear that said we are learning more and more about the potential dangers of ecigarette use or `` vaping '' the pros and cons of ecigarettes revealed a new report details the potential benefits and risks of ecigarette use read now in 2017 medical news today reported on a study that linked the flavorings in ecigarette liquid to impaired heart muscle function a more recent report claims that there is `` substantial evidence '' that ecigarette use increases heart rate and that some chemicals in the vapor can harm dna the study by tang and team provides further evidence of the harms of ecigarettes after finding that exposure to ecigarette vapor can damage dna in a way that could cause cancer and heart disease ecigarette vapor caused dna damage the researchers came to their findings by exposing 10 male mice to ecigarette vapor containing 10 milligrams of nicotine which is comparable with what humans inhale for 3 hours per day 5 days per week for 12 weeks when compared with a control group of mice that inhaled filtered air they found that the mice exposed to ecigarette vapor showed dna damage in their heart lungs and bladder what is more the scientists found that exposure to ecigarette vapor halted dna repair processes in the lung tissue of mice they found the same outcomes when testing longterm exposure to ecigarette vapor on human lung and bladder cells in conclusion to their findings tang and colleagues write '' based on these results we propose that ecs ecigarette smoke is carcinogenic and that ecig smokers have a higher risk than nonsmokers to develop lung and bladder cancer and heart diseases '' critics of the research however claim that this study does not prove that ecigarettes are harmful to health talking to the guardian peter hajek the director of the tobacco dependence research unit at queen mary university of london in the united kingdom says that the `` study shows nothing at all about the dangers of vaping '' he continues saying `` it doesnt show that vaping causes cancer this is one in a long line of false alarms which may be putting people off the switch from smoking to vaping which would undoubtedly be of great benefit to them '' it seems that the jury is out on whether or not vaping can cause cancer and heart disease but one thing is clear more studies are needed to find outbreaking research concludes that the use of two existing drugs could successfully treat certain lung cancers the study delves deep into the molecular survival kit of lung tumors understanding how lung tumors survive and grow leads to an innovative new treatment lung cancer is now the leading cause of cancer death in the united states responsible for almost 160000 deaths each year many are driven by the kras oncogene kras is an essential gene but in its mutant form it is an important step in the generation of many types of cancer for over 30 years the kras oncogene has been a focus of research finding a way to remove its teeth would be pivotal in the treatment of a range of cancers as part of this effort rather than targeting the gene directly some scientists have focused on pathways that are related to the errant gene one pathway of interest centers on insulin and insulinlike growth factor1 igf1 this pathway helps to regulate the uptake of nutrients into the cell providing it with the energy and raw ingredients it needs to grow if the tumor cells fuel supply could be severed its onward march might be halted however it is not clear whether kras oncogenes are reliant on this particular pathway and in clinical trials results have not been encouraging in fact one study in mice found that lung tumors actually became more aggressive after the pathway was suppressed attacking krasrelated pathways undeterred a team from the boston childrens hospital in massachusetts used a fresh approach in the mouse study mentioned above the insulinigf1 signaling pathway was only partially closed off in the latest study though a genetic technique was used that shut it down entirely to do this the scientists crossed two strains of genetically modified mice the first is a wellused model for krasdriven lung cancer and the other is a mouse used to study diabetes that lacks insulinigf1 signaling in the diabetes mouse model the insulinigf1 pathway is unshackled by the deletion of two genes irs1 and irs2 these encode `` adaptor '' proteins which are essential for the smooth running of the insulinigf1 pathway '' our study uses a robust way to block insulinigf1 signaling and addresses a longstanding question in krasmutant lung cancer when you use genetics results can be more conclusive '' senior study author nada kalaany phd an assistant professor at harvard medical school boston ma using their new model the scientists demonstrated that by suppressing the two adaptor proteins insulinigf1 signaling is blocked and lung tumors are significantly suppressed '' almost all animals in this lung cancer model typically die within 15 weeks of kras activation '' says kalaany `` but the ones that lost both irs1 and irs2 were completely fine we saw almost no tumors at 10 to 15 weeks '' this finding is important because drugs that block insulinigf1 signaling are already in use and freely available the results are published this week in the proceedings of the national academy of sciences while the preliminary findings are hopeful the researchers knew that there was more work to be done cancer is a complex evermorphing disease with a terrifying knack for circumventing medical interventions outfoxing lung cancer to observe whether the cancer cells were able to navigate around this new roadblock the team let the animals live longer to see what happened next as kalaany explains `` sure enough at around 16 weeks we started seeing some tumors so then we asked how were these tumor cells able to overcome loss of irs1 and irs2 '' how lung cancer cells disguise themselves to evade chemo by adopting the traits of cells from other major organs lung cancer cells can escape chemotherapy read now the answer was found in the levels of essential cellular building blocks amino acids tumor cells lacking the adaptor proteins failed to move amino acids into their cells despite a plentiful supply outside of the cell '' growth factors like igf1 tell cells that nutrients are around '' says kalaany `` so when you suppress their signaling the tumor cells dont take up the amino acids and think they are starved '' '' but we found that the tumor cells can compensate for this and break down their own proteins to generate amino acids '' so the krasdriven tumors threw out a curve ball they had once again figured out a workaround by breaking themselves down in a process known as autophagy they can generate the raw material they need to thrive the researchers however were one step ahead heading cancer off at the pass drugs that inhibit protein breakdown are already available these include chloroquine which is currently involved in a number of cancer drug trials and bortezomib which blocks proteasomes proteindigesting structures and is already used to treat myeloma when the two prongs of the attack were combined the results were more than encouraging they found that tumor cells lacking irs1 and irs2 did not grow well and when the inhibitors were added growth stopped almost completely additional studies will now be needed to understand how these two drug types might interact in a patient however this is a considerable breakthrough and the researchers are excited to take it to the next phase '' our work tries to identify metabolic dependencies and vulnerabilities in tumors '' says kalaany `` if we identify collaborators we would love to have a clinical trial in nonsmallcell lung cancer combining igf1 inhibitors with autophagy inhibitors or proteasome inhibitors '' by testing to breaking point every part of a tumor cells survival kit researchers will one day beat cancerhigh blood pressure or hypertension is a major risk factor for heart disease the leading cause of death in the united states but a new study has found that two classes of medication that are commonly used to lower blood pressure could present a death risk all on their own researchers have identified two blood pressure drugs that could raise mortality risk scientists at the intermountain medical center heart institute in salt lake city ut found that individuals with hypertension who used alpha blockers and alpha2 agonists to control their blood pressure showed an increase in blood pressure variability which could increase mortality risk lead study author dr brian clements and team have recently presented their findings at the 2018 american college of cardiology acc scientific sessions held in orlando fl blood pressure is the force of blood that pushes against the wall of the arteries and in november last year the american heart association aha and the acc set new guidelines now a person is considered to have hypertension if their systolic blood pressure the top number is 130 millimeters of mercury mmhg or higher and their diastolic blood pressure the bottom number is 80 mmhg or higher systolic blood pressure is the force of blood against the artery walls when the heart is beating while diastolic blood pressure is the force of blood when the heart is at rest or between heartbeats the updated guidelines mean that almost half of adults in the united states have high blood pressure which puts them at greater risk of heart attack stroke and heart disease among other health problems of course when it comes to treating hypertension the goal is to lower blood pressure this may be achieved through lifestyle changes such as adopting a healthful diet and increasing physical activity medication or both previous research however has discovered that consistency is key for blood pressure levels a study published in the bmj in 2016 for example associated higher variability of systolic blood pressure with a 15 percent increase in allcause mortality according to the new study from dr clements and colleagues certain types of medication that are used to lower blood pressure may be contributing to this mortality risk two medications should be avoided for their study the researchers analyzed the data of over 10500 adults with high blood pressure the participants had their blood pressure measured at least seven times between january 2007 and december 2011 and the type of blood pressure medication they were using was monitored common blood pressure drug raises skin cancer risk researchers reveal how a blood pressure medication may increase the risk of skin cancer read now the team used these data to assess whether certain classes of blood pressure medication were associated with variability in blood pressure levels the study revealed two classes of blood pressure medication that were linked to higher blood pressure variability in subjects alpha blockers and alpha2 agonists alpha blockers which include doxazosin mesylate and prazosin hydrochloride work by dilating the blood vessels alpha2 agonists such as methyldopa work by targeting sympathetic nervous system activity thereby reducing blood vessel constriction based on the study results dr clements and colleagues say that these two medications should not be used to treat hypertension '' patients should know what their blood pressure is '' he says `` and if its up and down all the time the patient should work with their physician to explore options for the best blood pressure medications that will reduce variances '' '' where possible the two types of medications that show an increase in variances should be avoided '' dr brian clements dr clements adds that ace inhibitors angiotensin receptor blockers calcium channel blockers and thiazide diuretics may be safer treatment options for people with hypertension `` people who are on other types of blood pressure medications have an increased risk of death '' he adds however blood pressure variability is not solely down to medication dr clements notes that the way in which blood pressure is measured can have a significant effect on readings '' because of the variables that affect blood pressure measurements '' says dr clements `` finding ways to more accurately measure blood pressure can better identify effective treatments for patients who have hypertension '' for accurate blood pressure readings he recommends sitting or laying down for 15 minutes before measurements are taken avoiding stressful situations and using a wellfitting blood pressure cuff may also helpa new study reveals that individuals with higher levels of belly fat and larger waistlines are more likely to have lower vitamin d levels where fat is stored on the body may impact vitamin d levels currently in medical circles vitamin d is the talk of the town produced in our skin on contact with sunlight it plays a myriad of roles in the human body in the past few months medical news today have covered a wealth of research into the group of fatsoluble secosteroids more commonly known as vitamin d for instance recent studies have found that vitamin d might protect against heart failure diabetes and cancer and that vitamin d deficiency causes hair loss vitamin d deficiency has traditionally been linked to bone health but it may also have a role to play in respiratory tract infections and autoimmune disease among others with more than 40 percent of the population of the united states being vitamin d deficient this is a serious issue some authors have referred to it as `` an ignored epidemic '' estimating that over 1 billion people worldwide have inadequate levels vitamin d and belly fat exposed they discovered that in women both total and abdominal fat were associated with lower vitamin d levels but that abdominal fat had the greatest impact in men however lower vitamin d levels were significantly linked with fat in the liver and abdomen across both sexes more belly fat predicted lower levels of vitamin d rafiq explains `` the strong relationship between increasing amounts of abdominal fat and lower levels of vitamin d suggests that individuals with larger waistlines are at a greater risk of developing deficiency and should consider having their vitamin d levels checked '' her next step is to understand why this relationship exists does a deficiency in vitamin d cause fat to be stored in the abdominal region or does belly fat decrease levels of vitamin d it will take more work to tease apart cause and effect as rafiq explains `` due to the observational nature of this study we can not draw a conclusion on the direction or cause of the association between obesity and vitamin d levels '' '' however this strong association may point to a possible role for vitamin d in abdominal fat storage and function '' rachida rafiq the links between obesity and vitamin d deficiency are growing increasingly robust the next challenge is working out a way to effectively tackle this issuebaking soda has been used as a home remedy for generations due to its antacid properties yet its benefits run even deeper and new research may explain why it is an effective aid in the treatment of autoimmune diseases such as arthritis how can this kitchen staple change the bodys inflammatory response baking soda also called sodium bicarbonate is a kitchen staple commonly used as a raising agent for cakes that being said it has also made a name for itself as a home remedy for various conditions half a teaspoon of baking soda is often taken to ease heartburn or acid reflux for example and this substance is also used to whiten teeth in a new study whose findings are now published in the journal of immunology researchers from the medical college of georgia at augusta university reveal exactly how drinking a solution of baking soda could prime the immune system against inflammatory diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis paul oconnor a renal physiologist at augusta university and colleagues tested the effects that drinking a baking soda solution would have first on rats and then on humans their experiments tell a complex story about how this salt provides a signal to a special kind of cell called `` mesothelial cells '' telling them that the body is fine and not under attack rendering an aggressive immune system unnecessary thus harmful autoimmune responses are averted baking soda and mesothelial cells mesothelial cells line the internal organs as well as many different cavities in the body not only do they prevent organs and other internal tissue from sticking together they also serve other functions not all of which have been studied in detail in the new study oconnor and team tested the effect that a baking soda solution would have first on rats and then on healthy human participants and they noted that it influenced an intriguing mechanism can this biochemical switch off inflammation researchers may have found a way to `` switch off '' certain immune cells when necessary read now baking soda `` prompts '' the stomach to produce more gastric acid which allows it to digest food quicker and easier but in addition to this it also seems to tell the mesothelial cells that line the spleen to `` take it easy '' because there is no threat basically in oconnor words mesothelial cells learn that `` its most likely a hamburger not a bacterial infection '' so they in turn do not activate the spleens `` army '' of macrophages or white blood cells tasked with clearing up potentially harmful cellular detritus '' certainly drinking bicarbonate affects the spleen and we think its through the mesothelial cells '' oconnor explains mesothelial cells communicate with the organs they line using small projections called microvilli and the medium through which they send their message is the neurotransmitter acetylcholine from inflammatory to antiinflammatory so what actually happens the study authors note that those who drank the baking soda solution experienced a shift in the kinds of immune cells activated in the spleen in fact proinflammatory macrophages m1 dwindled in number while the levels of antiinflammatory cells m2 rose the same kinds of cells are also housed in the blood and kidneys and baking soda happens to be used in the treatment of chronic kidney disease this idea prompted the new studys authors to explore the mechanisms through which this substance might help to improve renal function '' we started thinking how does baking soda slow progression of kidney disease '' says oconnor at first the researchers analyzed the effects of the baking soda solution on a rat model of kidney disease and then again on healthy rats which acted as the control sample this is when the researchers noticed that the levels of m1 cells in the kidneys dropped while those of m2 cells increased both the rats with kidney disease and the healthy rats presented the same development and it was this shift that flagged up the notion that baking soda could influence the inflammatory response at cellular level when the researchers recruited healthy medical students and asked them to drink the baking soda solution it became apparent the antiinflammatory effect of this substance happened in the spleen as well as in the blood '' the shift from inflammatory to an antiinflammatory profile is happening everywhere we saw it in the kidneys we saw it in the spleen now we see it in the peripheral blood '' paul oconnor safe way to treat inflammatory disease one of the authors main revelations was the fact that it was the mesothelial cells that mediated the antiinflammatory signals an existing working theory had been that signals were transmitted to the relevant cells through the vagus nerve a long cranial nerve that communicates with the heart lungs and various organs in the abdomen but experiments revealed that this idea was incorrect when the scientists tried cutting off this nerve this did not affect the behavior of the mesothelial cells instead it became apparent that these cells had a more direct communication with the organs they lined than previously thought oconnor and his team became aware of this when they noted that moving the spleen affected mesothelial cells that lined it and the signals modulating the inflammatory response were lost '' we think the cholinergic acetylcholine signals that we know mediate this antiinflammatory response arent coming directly from the vagal nerve innervating the spleen but from the mesothelial cells that form these connections to the spleen '' explains oconnor the results begin to provide an answer as to why baking soda can help with autoimmune diseases including arthritis and further research into these mechanisms could help to optimize the results obtained through this common compound '' its potentially a really safe way to treat inflammatory disease '' oconnor concludesanxiety disorders are common across the united states thought to affect around 40 million adults each year however as if these feelings of worry and fear arent enough to contend with a new study suggests that older people who have worsening anxiety symptoms may be more likely to develop alzheimers disease researchers have linked increasing anxiety symptoms in older age to higher levels of a protein linked to alzheimers researchers found that increasing symptoms of anxiety were linked to higher levels of betaamyloid which is a protein associated with alzheimers disease in the brains of older people with normal cognitive functioning first study author dr nancy donovan who is a geriatric psychiatrist at brigham and womens hospital in boston ma and team say that the results suggest that a rise in the sypmtoms of anxiety could be an early sign of alzheimers the findings were recently published in the american journal of psychiatry alzheimers disease is a form of dementia characterized by problems with memory and thinking as well as changes in behavior it is estimated that around 55 million people in the us are living with alzheimers of whom around 54 million are over the age of 65 the precise causes of alzheimers disease remain unclear but scientists believe that betaamyloid plays a key role this is a protein that can form `` plaques '' which have been found to block nerve cell communication in the brains of people with alzheimers these plaques are considered to be a hallmark of the disease and research has suggested that an increase in betaamyloid levels can occur up to 10 years before the onset of alzheimers symptoms according to the new study anxiety could play a significant role in increased betaamyloid levels among older adults targeting anxiety may slow alzheimers previous studies have suggested that depression and anxiety might be indicators of alzheimers since symptoms of these mental health conditions often occur in the early stages of the disease for their study dr donovan and colleagues sought to determine whether or not betaamyloid might play a role in this association alzheimers tripleaction diabetes drug shows promise as treatment researchers reveal how a diabetes drug could help to treat alzheimers read now the research included 270 adults between age 62 and 90 with normal cognitive functioning all of whom underwent positron emission tomography at study baseline and annually during 5 years of followup in order to determine levels of betaamyloid in their brains symptoms of anxiety and depression among the adults were assessed using the 30item geriatric depression scale it was found that adults who showed an increase in anxiety symptoms over 5 years of followup also had higher levels of betaamyloid in their brains the researchers say that this indicates that worsening anxiety might be an early sign of alzheimers disease '' if further research substantiates anxiety as an early indicator it would be important for not only identifying people early on with the disease but also treating it and potentially slowing or preventing the disease process early on '' dr nancy donovan the scientists point out that followup studies are required to determine whether older adults who experience an increase in anxiety symptoms actually go on to develop alzheimersnew results could change the face of alzheimers treatment the herpes simplex virus is found to play a vital role in the condition and antiherpetic medication is shown to have a dramatic effect on dementia risk alzheimers disease may soon be treated with antiviral medication last month medical news today reported on a study that found `` strong evidence '' that viruses are involved in alzheimers disease the postmortem analyses of brain tissue found that people who lived with this dementia type also had more herpesviruses 6 and 7 than people without alzheimers now a scientific commentary suggests that the study that mnt covered is not the only one to pinpoint a link between herpes and dementia in fact three more studies have strengthened this link and the commentary recently published in the journal of alzheimers disease – takes a look at all three ruth itzhaki who is a professor of neuroscience and experimental psychology at the university of manchester in the united kingdom alongside richard lathe who is a professor in the division of infection and pathway medicine at the university of edinburgh also in the uk authored the commentary remarkable magnitude of antiviral effect the studies referenced in the commentary are two articles tsai et al 2017 and chen et al 2018 that suggest that acute herpes zoster infection puts people at a higher risk of dementia and one article that shows that aggressive treatment with antiherpetic medication drastically lowers dementia risk the latter study deemed `` most important '' by profs itzhaki and lathe examined 8362 people aged 50 and above who received a diagnosis of herpes simplex virus hsv infection as well as a control group of 25086 agematched healthy people breakthrough researchers fix alzheimers gene by correcting the faulty apoe4 gene researchers were able to erase its damaging effects on the brain read now the two groups were followed for almost a decade between 2001 and 2010 in the herpes group the risk of dementia was over 25 times higher than in the control group significantly the study also revealed that aggressive antiviral treatment reduced the relative risk of dementia by 10 times prof lathe comments on these new findings saying `` not only is the magnitude of the antiviral effect remarkable but also the fact that despite the relatively brief duration and the timing of treatment in most patients severely affected by hsv1 it appeared to prevent the longterm damage in the brain that results in alzheimers '' '' this article and two others provide the first population evidence for a causal link between herpes virus infection and alzheimers disease a hugely important finding '' prof ruth itzhaki '' i believe we are the first to realize the implications of these striking data on this devastating condition which principally affects the elderly '' prof itzhaki adds '' but '' she says `` we believe that these safe and easily available antivirals may have a strong part to play in combating the disease in these patients '' she also suggests that in the future it may be possible to prevent the disease `` by vaccination against the virus in infancy '' '' successful treatment by a specific drug or successful vaccination against the putative microbe are the only ways to prove that a microbe is the cause of a noninfectious human disease '' says prof itzhakiwith marijuana legalization on the rise an increasing number of studies are exploring the drugs potential harms and benefits however a new study suggests that when it comes to brain health alcohol is more damaging researchers say that alcohol causes more damage to the brain than marijuana does scientists at the university of colorado boulder conducted a review of existing imaging data that looked at the effects of alcohol and marijuana or cannabis on the brain their findings linked alcohol consumption with longterm changes to the structure of white matter and gray matter in the brain the use of marijuana however seemed to have no significant longterm effects on brain structure study leader rachel thayer of the department of psychology and neuroscience at the university of colorado boulder and colleagues recently reported their results in the journal addiction it is estimated that around 222 million people in the united states have used marijuana in the past month making it `` the most commonly used illicit drug '' in the country across the us however it is increasingly becoming legalized for both medicinal and recreational purposes as a result of this changing legislation researchers have been trying to find out more about how marijuana may benefit health as well as the damage that it could cause last year for example medical news today reported on a study linking marijuana use to a greater risk of psychosis in teenagers while another study claimed that the drug is `` worse than cigarettes '' for cardiovascular health on the other side of the coin researchers have found that cannabinoids which are the active compounds in marijuana could help to prevent migraine and a more recent study linked marijuana use to an increased sex drive marijuana vs alcohol which is worse for this latest study thayer and colleagues sought to learn more about how marijuana use affects the brain study coauthor kent hutchison also of the department of psychology and neuroscience notes that to date studies that have investigated this association have produced mixed results '' when you look at these studies going back years '' he explains `` you see that one study will report that marijuana use is related to a reduction in the volume of the hippocampus the next study then comes around and they say that marijuana use is related to changes in the cerebellum `` teen marijuana use may lead to bipolar symptoms later on researchers have linked marijuana use in adolescence to a greater risk of bipolar symptoms read now '' the point is that theres no consistency across all of these studies in terms of the actual brain structures '' with the aim of closing the gap on this inconsistency the researchers conducted a new analysis on existing brain imaging data they looked at how marijuana use affects white matter and gray matter in the brain and how its effects compare with another `` drug '' that we have become so accustomed to alcohol gray matter is the tissue on the brains surface that primarily consists of nerve cell bodies white matter is the deeper brain tissue that contains myelinated nerve fibers which are branches protruding from nerve cells that transmit electrical impulses to other cells and tissues the team notes that any reduction in the size of white or gray matter or a loss in their integrity can lead to impairments in brain functioning '' with alcohol weve known its bad for the brain for decades '' notes hutchison `` but for cannabis we know so little '' marijuana use had no impact the study included the brain images of 853 adults who were aged between 18 and 55 years and 439 teenagers between the ages of 14 and 18 all participants varied in their use of alcohol and marijuana the researchers found that alcohol use particularly in adults who had been drinking for many years was associated with a reduction in gray matter volume as well as a reduction in the integrity of white matter marijuana use however appeared to have no impact on the structure of gray or white matter in either teenagers or adults based on these findings the researchers believe that drinking alcohol is likely to be much more harmful to brain health than using marijuana '' while marijuana may also have some negative consequences it definitely is nowhere near the negative consequences of alcohol '' kent hutchison when it comes to the possible benefits of marijuana use however thayer and her team note that the jury is still out and further research is needed to reach some conclusionsa form of intermittent fasting known as the 168 diet helps obese individuals to lose weight and lower their blood pressure according to a new study timerestricted eating may be the key to weight loss more and more people now turn to intermittent fasting as a fast and effective way to lose weight there are different form of this diet depending on the time intervals of `` fasting '' and `` feasting '' the socalled 52 diet for instance consists of eating normally for 5 days every week and fasting for 2 days in the fasting days the dieter restricts their calorie intake to 500 or 600 per day in daily fasting or the 168 diet people eat whatever they like for 8 hours and fast for the remaining 16 a new study evaluates the benefits of this 168 pattern for obese individuals and finds that not only does the diet work but also that it helps to lower blood pressure as many as 933 million adults have obesity in the united states according to the latest data from the centers for disease control and prevention cdc thats almost 40 percent of the countrys entire population this research was led by corresponding author krista varady an associate professor of kinesiology and nutrition at the university of illinois at chicago and the findings were published in the journal nutrition and healthy aging losing weight without counting calories varady and colleagues recruited 23 obese study participants who were aged 45 years on average with an average body mass index bmi of 35 between 10 am and 6 pm the participants could eat whatever and however much they liked but they were only allowed to drink water and caloriefree drinks for the remaining 16 hours intermittent fasting may have profound health benefits some researchers say that this type of diet can also slow down aging and stave off disease read now all the study participants were followed for a period of 12 weeks and their dieting outcomes were compared with those of a previous weight loss trial of another type of intermittent fasting called `` alternate day fasting '' in alternate day fasting they can eat whatever they like for one day and fast for the following day on average when compared with the control trial those on the 168 diet consumed 350 fewer calories lost 3 percent of their weight and had lower blood pressure more specifically the systolic blood pressure of those who fasted daily dropped by an average of 7 millimeters of mercury however insulin resistance cholesterol and fat mass remained the same between the two compared groups as varady and her colleagues conclude `` these preliminary data offer promise for the use of timerestricted feeding as a weight loss technique in obese adults but longerterm largescale randomized controlled trials are required '' the studys corresponding author also comments on the significance of the findings saying `` the results we saw in this study are similar to the results weve seen in other studies on alternate day fasting '' '' but '' she adds `` one of the benefits of the 168 diet may be that it is easier for people to maintain we observed that fewer participants dropped out of this study when compared to studies on other fasting diets '' '' the takehome message from this study is that there are options for weight loss that do not include calorie counting or eliminating certain foods '' krista varady '' the 168 diet is another tool for weight loss that we now have preliminary scientific evidence to support '' varady concludes `` when it comes to weight loss people need to find what works for them because even small amounts of success can lead to improvements in metabolic health ''fish oil is hailed for its plentiful health benefits but new research suggests that the longterm consumption of fish oil or sunflower oil may increase the risk of fatty liver disease later in life researchers say that lifelong intake of fish oil or sunflower oil could raise the risk of fatty liver disease in later life by studying rats researchers found that lifelong intake of sunflower oil or fish oil led to changes in the liver that make the organ vulnerable to nonalcoholic steatohepatitis nash nash is a more serious form of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease nafld study coauthor josé luis quiles a professor of physiology working at the university of granada in spain and colleagues recently reported their findings in the journal of nutritional biochemistry it is estimated that around 20 percent of people in the united states who have nafld also have nash and the condition becomes more common with age nash is characterized by a buildup of fat in the liver which is not caused by alcohol consumption inflammation and liver cell damage the liver damage that occurs in nash can increase the risk of liver cirrhosis and liver cancer some of the key risk factors for nash include overweight and obesity high blood pressure high cholesterol and type 2 diabetes which are factors heavily influenced by diet studying how dietary fats affect the liver building on the link between diet and nash the new study from prof quiles and his colleagues suggests that the type of oils we consume could play a role in our laterlife risk of the condition the researchers came to their findings by analyzing the effects of different dietary fats including sunflower oil fish oil and virgin olive oil on rat livers in detail the team looked at how lifelong intake of each of these oils impacted the structure of the rodents livers as well as their effects on gene expression liver fibrosis or scarring oxidative stress and the length of telomeres kiwi compound may prevent nonalcoholic fatty liver disease research suggests that nafld could be prevented with a compound found in kiwi read now oxidative stress is defined as an imbalance between free radicals which are molecules that can damage cells and the bodys ability to `` deoxidize '' these molecules and prevent their harmful effects telomeres are `` caps '' at the end of each strand of dna and they protect our chromosomes the shorter our telomeres the greater the damage to our cells research has shown that a reduction in telomere length plays a key role in cellular aging and agerelated disease telomeres that are too long however can increase the risk of cancer additionally the team looked at how the liver evolves with age as a result of the different dietary fats consumed olive oil best for a healthy liver the researchers not only found that liver fat accumulates with age but they also revealed that the type of fat that builds up on the liver is influenced by the type of fats that we eat as prof quiles points out `` this means that regardless of this accumulation some livers age in a healthier way than others and with a greater or lesser predisposition to certain diseases '' the study revealed that fish oil and sunflower oil negatively impacted the liver health of the rats lifelong sunflower oil intake was found to trigger liver fibrosis and it also altered the structure of the organ led to changes in gene expression and increased oxidation in liver cells rats that had a lifelong intake of fish oil demonstrated an increase in agerelated cell oxidation in their livers the team reports and they also experienced a decrease in electron transport chain activity in the mitochondria the `` powerhouses '' of the cell which impairs cell function fish oil also led to an increase in relative telomere length in the liver the researchers report olive oil however was found to cause the least damage to the liver taken together the team says these findings indicate that virgin olive oil might be the best dietary fat for laterlife liver health '' the alterations caused by the longterm consumption of sunflower and fish oils make the liver susceptible to nonalcoholic steatohepatitis a very serious disease that may act as a catalyst for other liver diseases such as cirrhosis and liver cancer we believe that this study will be very useful in preventing and treating diverse liver diseases '' prof josé luis quiles '' virgin olive oil is the healthiest option '' he adds `` which has already been proven in relation to diverse aspects of health '' these findings may come as a surprise fish oil is the most commonly used natural product in the us due to its frequently documented health benefits still this latest study certainly provides some food for thought when it comes to choosing which fats to include in the dietpopular belief has it and even some governmental authorities on nutrition agree that we should avoid fullfat dairy products due to their high content of saturated fats but a new study boldly challenges these claims fullfat dairy products may actually be good for cardiovascular health wholefat dairy does not raise cardiovascular risk conversely some fats present in certain dairy products might even keep stroke and heart disease at bay this is the main takeaway of a recent study led by dr dariush mozaffarian from the friedman school of nutrition science and policy at tufts university in boston ma with their findings dr mozaffarian and team challenge not only popular opinions but also the stance of governmental organizations such as the united states department of agriculture usda and the us department of health human services the two bodies advise people to avoid fullfat dairy due to its impact on cholesterol levels the saturated fats found in wholefat dairy products warn the usda raise levels of lowdensity lipoprotein ldl cholesterol also known as the `` bad '' kind of cholesterol in time high ldl cholesterol may lead to cardiovascular conditions such as atherosclerosis or coronary artery disease however the new study turns the idea that fullfat dairy is bad for you on its head the surprising findings were published in the american journal of clinical nutrition marcia otto who is an assistant professor in the department of epidemiology human genetics and environmental sciences at the university of texas health science center at houston is the first and corresponding author of the paper dairy fat may prevent heart disease stroke to study the effect of dairy on mortality risk and cardiovascular health dr mozaffarian and team examined over 2900 us seniors aged 65 and above the researchers measured the participants blood plasma levels of three fatty acids contained by dairy products at the beginning of the study in 1992 6 years later and then 13 years later associations with `` total mortality causespecific mortality and cardiovascular disease cvd risk '' were examined these four foods are proven to lower your cholesterol the `` portfolio diet '' has been proved to keep the heart healthy by several studies read now during the 22year followup period 2428 of the participants died of these deaths 833 were due to heart disease however none of the three fatty acids examined correlated with the risk of total mortality in fact high circulating levels of heptadecanoic fatty acid were associated with a lower risk of death from heart disease also adults with higher levels of fatty acids overall were 42 percent less likely to die from stroke revealed the analysis dietary guidelines should be revised according to the studys corresponding author the findings suggest that current dietary guidelines need to be amended the 2015–2020 dietary guidelines for americans issued by the office of disease prevention and health promotion recommend the consumption of `` fatfree and lowfat 1 percent dairy including milk yogurt cheese or fortified soy beverages commonly known as soymilk '' however otto disagrees `` consistent with previous findings '' she says `` our results highlight the need to revisit current dietary guidance on whole fat dairy foods which are rich sources of nutrients such as calcium and potassium '' '' these are essential for health not only during childhood but throughout life particularly also in later years when undernourishment and conditions like osteoporosis are more common '' adds the researcher '' dairy fat contrary to popular belief does not increase the risk of heart disease or overall mortality in older adults in addition the results suggest that one fatty acid present in dairy may lower risk of death from cardiovascular disease particularly from stroke '' marcia otto she adds `` consumers have been exposed to so much different and conflicting information about diet particularly in relation to fats '' and she highlights the fact that `` a growing body of evidence '' suggests that dairy fat is actually good for you '' its important to have robust studies so people can make more balanced and informed choices based on scientific fact rather than hearsay '' otto concludesa new study looking at blood stem cells uncovered fresh details surrounding the mechanisms by which alcohol raises the risk of developing cancer a new study unearths the details of cancers relationship with alcohol alcohol is known to raise the risk of no fewer than seven types of cancer these are mouth upper throat pharynx voice box laryngeal esophageal breast liver and bowel cancer though the links are established exactly how alcohol works to induce malignancy is not as wellunderstood several mechanisms are thought to be at work most previous studies have only examined cells in the laboratory looking at changes in them after exposure to alcohol ethanol recently researchers from mrc laboratory of molecular biology in cambridge united kingdom set out to gain a clearer picture of the alcoholcancer relationship using whole animals their study which was funded by cancer research uk is published this week in the journal nature acetaldehyde and blood stem cells the team fed diluted ethanol to mice and then used chromosome analysis and dna sequencing to measure any damage caused by acetaldehyde a chemical produced when alcohol is processed they focused their attention on a specific cell type blood stem cells blood stem cells found in blood and bone marrow are immature blood cells that can develop into any type of blood cell including white blood cells platelets and red blood cells it is important to understand how alcohol damages these cells as faulty stem cells are known to cause cancer as alcohol is broken down in the gut bacteria convert it into large quantities of acetaldehyde a chemical that has previously been shown to cause cancer in animals even light drinkers at risk of cancer a recent statement from the american society of clinical oncology outlines the dangers of alcohol read now following the analysis the researchers found that acetaldehyde could in fact damage and break dna within blood stem cells chromosomes became rearranged and the dna sequence was permanently changed in stem cells lead study author prof ketan patel says `` some cancers develop due to dna damage in stem cells while some damage occurs by chance our findings suggest that drinking alcohol can increase the risk of this damage '' selfdefense mechanisms alongside new insights into the damage that ethanol causes to stem cells the scientists uncovered new information about the protective mechanisms employed by our bodies in response to alcohol enzymes called aldehyde dehydrogenases aldhs form the first line of defense against alcoholrelated damage aldhs break alcohol down into acetate `` which our cells can use as a source of energy '' millions of people many east asians for instance have low levels of aldh or faulty copies of the enzymes this means that toxic acetaldehyde builds up in the body these individuals will experience telltale flushed cheeks and potentially feel ill when the researchers investigated mice without aldh they found that alcohol caused four times as much damage to dna when compared with mice that could produce aldh beyond aldh the body has a range of other secondary mechanisms that can repair various types of dna damage but these mechanisms do not always work some people have mutations that render them ineffective '' our study highlights that not being able to process alcohol effectively can lead to an even higher risk of alcoholrelated dna damage and therefore certain cancers '' prof ketan patel '' but '' he continues `` its important to remember that alcohol clearance and dna repair systems are not perfect and alcohol can still cause cancer in different ways even in people whose defense mechanisms are intact '' alcohol is known to give rise to cancer and studies such as this help us to understand why and will eventually help to prevent or slow alcoholrelated cancers as prof linda bauld from cancer research uk says `` this thoughtprovoking research highlights the damage alcohol can do to our cells costing some people more than just a hangover ''it was previously believed that fructose which is the sugar found in fruit and fruit juice is processed by the liver however a new study suggests that fructose is mainly processed in the small intestine researchers reveal that fructose is primarily processed in the small intestine not the liver the study which is published in the journal cell metabolism reveals that processed highsugar food and drink only spills over into the liver for processing when the small intestine becomes overwhelmed the recent findings add to the body of scientific knowledge on the effects of too much fructose on the body we know from previous research that excessive consumption of sugar is harmful to the liver and that chronic overconsumption causes obesity increases resistance to insulin and creates conditions for the onset of diabetes last year medical news today reported on a study that found that fructosecontaining products such as sweetened drinks can increase the risk of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis a form of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease `` which can lead to cirrhosis or liver cancer '' study observed fructose digestion in mice the researchers from princeton university in new jersey used mice to study how fructose travels through the digestive system their findings suggest that there is a physiological difference in how the body processes different amounts of sugar rather than the liver processing all the sugar in the body the team observed that more than 90 percent of fructose was processed in the small intestines of the mice in the study the team found that fructose not absorbed into the small intestine is passed through to the colon where it comes into contact with the microbiome which is the microbiotic flora that inhabits the large intestine and colon fruit juices and smoothies have unacceptably high sugar content researchers reveal that a childs entire daily sugar allowance could be in one serving of fruit juice read now the researchers explain that the microbiome is not designed to process sugar so while a person could eat a large amount of carbohydrates without exposing their microbiome to any sugar this changes significantly when highsugar products such as soda and juice are consumed while the findings do not prove that fructose influences the microbiome the team believes that `` an effect is likely '' they suggest that this link should be further investigated in future studies as it may provide new insights into the adverse effects of high sugar intake eat sugar only after meals in the study the small intestine was found to clear fructose more efficiently after a meal the team theorizes that during periods of fasting such as in the morning or midafternoon individuals may be more vulnerable to fructose as the small intestine has reduced ability to process it during these times as study author joshua d rabinowitz of the lewissigler institute for integrative genomics at princeton university explains `` we can offer some reassurance at least from these animal studies that fructose from moderate amounts of fruits will not reach the liver '' '' we saw that feeding of the mice prior to the sugar exposure enhanced the small intestines ability to process fructose '' rabinowitz continues `` and that protected the liver and the microbiome from sugar exposure '' rabinowitz says that the results support `` the most oldfashioned advice in the world '' which is to `` limit sweets to moderate quantities after meals '' and avoid sugary drinks outside of meal timesit is known that being overweight or obese leads to poor health but it may be less known that abdominal fat is the most harmful type until now researchers were unsure of the mechanisms responsible for this but now they reveal how an enzyme produced by our liver raises the risk of diabetes inflammation in the fat around the belly is particularly harmful and new research reveals why when it comes to the harmful consequences of excess fat the way it is distributed across the body is key medical news today have recently reported on studies showing that abdominal fat is deeply tied to type 2 diabetes and heart disease we have also covered studies suggesting that women in particular could be at an increased cardiometabolic risk if they have a higher waisttohip ratio additional research has found that belly fat is particularly dangerous when inflamed older studies have shown that local inflammation in the adipose tissue leads to cardiometabolic abnormalities such as insulin resistance but the exact mechanism responsible for this connection between adipose tissue inflammation and cardiometabolic disorders has remained somewhat unclear for instance researchers have wondered whether the inflammation is `` a cause or a consequence of insulin resistance '' now researchers at columbia university irving medical center in new york city ny help to shed some muchneeded light on the issue they reveal that the liver contributes to this inflammation the team was led by dr ira tabas who is the richard j stock professor of medicine at columbia university vagelos college of physicians and surgeons and the findings were published in the journal nature the key role of dpp4 inhibitors in diabetes dr tabas and his colleagues used obese mice to test whether blocking an enzyme called dpp4 would lower the inflammation in their abdominal fat the researchers focused on dpp4 because humans who already have diabetes are prescribed dpp4 inhibitors to help them manage their symptoms dpp4 inhibitors work by preventing the enzyme from interacting with an insulinboosting hormone lowcalorie sweeteners may promote metabolic syndrome people with metabolic syndrome are much more likely to develop diabetes to prevent it new research suggests that these people should avoid artificial sweeteners read now in this study dpp4 did not lower abdominal inflammation in mice dr tabas explains these findings suggesting that they may be down to the difference between how dpp4 inhibitors work in the gut versus how they work in the liver '' dpp4 inhibitors lower blood sugar by inhibiting dpp4 in the gut but we have some evidence that dpp4 inhibitors in the gut also end up promoting inflammation in fat '' he states `` that cancels out the antiinflammatory effects the drugs may have when they reach inflammatory cells called macrophages in the fat '' '' from our studies '' adds dr tabas `` we know that dpp4 interacts with a molecule on these cells to increase inflammation if we could block that interaction we might be able stop the enzyme from causing inflammation and insulin resistance '' so the researchers targeted dpp4 in the liver cells instead of the gut this reduced adipose inflammation and lowered insulin resistance dpp4 inhibitors also decreased blood sugar toward human clinical trials as dr tabas reports `` inhibiting dpp4 specifically in liver cells attacks insulin resistance the core problem of type 2 diabetes at least in our preclinical models '' the researchers explain what the findings mean for future treatments of type 2 diabetes dr tabas says `` if we can develop ways to target liver dpp4 in people this may be a powerful new way to treat obesityinduced type 2 diabetes '' dr ahmed a hasan a medical officer and program director in the atherothrombosis coronary artery disease branch of the national heart lung and blood institute also comments on the findings he says `` this study reveals a potential new target for the treatment of type 2 diabetes and cardiometabolic disorders '' '' these findings may pave the way for a future clinical trial to test whether a new treatment approach based on this target could improve insulin resistance in diabetic patients more research is needed '' dr ahmed a hasanby finding a link to a condition that raises the risk of type 2 diabetes new research questions the health benefits of ketogenic diets is there a link between diabetes and the keto diet ketogenic diets are lowcarbohydrate highfat diets that have been shown to reduce weight they change metabolism so that energy comes from fat instead of sugar when researchers in switzlerland examined what happened to mice in the early stages of a ketogenic diet they found that the animals showed a poorer ability to regulate blood sugar compared with similar mice on a highfat highcarbohydrate diet in a paper on their work now published in the journal of physiology they note that `` even though keto dietfed animals appear healthy in the fasted state they exhibit decreased glucose tolerance to a greater extent than highfat dietfed animals '' the reason for this they found was that the livers of the keto dietfed mice were not responding as well to insulin this condition which is known as insulin resistance raises the risk of developing type 2 diabetes '' diabetes is one of the biggest health issues we face '' says study author christian wolfrum who is with the institute of food nutrition and health at eth zürich in switzerland insulin resistance insulin is a hormone that helps the body control levels of blood sugar or glucose if blood sugar stays above normal for long periods of time it becomes a condition called hyperglycemia that can lead to serious health problems this is the hallmark of diabetes in type 1 diabetes hyperglycemia develops because the pancreas does not make enough insulin in type 2 diabetes organs and tissues lose their ability to respond to insulin the pancreas tries to compensate by making more insulin but eventually this is not enough and leads to hyperglycemia normal blood sugar levels may not be so normal after all researchers have found that `` normal '' levels of blood glucose often mask spikes that are considerably higher than what is considered healthy read now there are a number of ways in which insulin helps control blood glucose levels one is by signaling to the liver to reduce glucose production and another is by helping muscles and tissues absorb glucose and convert it into energy insulin resistance is a `` complex metabolic disorder '' with no obvious single cause the liver becomes insulin resistant when it fails to reduce glucose production in response to insulin cells can also become insulin resistant when they need increasing amounts of the hormone to help them use glucose however the researchers found that the main reason for decreased glucose tolerance in the keto dietfed mice was due to insulin resistance in the liver `` rather than impaired glucose clearance and tissue glucose uptake '' despite extensive research into the causes of insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes they are not completely understood one thing that scientists do know is that fatlike substances called lipids are `` clearly associated with insulin resistance '' even here however many questions remain such as `` is the link due to circulating fats or to fat buildup in tissue '' ketogenic diets and ketosis by dramatically reducing intake of carbohydrates keto diets induce a metabolic state known as ketosis in this state cells that would normally get their energy from glucose switch to ketones the lack of carbohydrates makes the body break down fats into fatty acids and then into ketones keto diets are probably among the `` most studied '' approaches to weight loss of recent times a lot of research now backs the idea that keto diets have a sound `` physiological and biochemical basis '' and can significantly benefit cardiovascular health this is welcome news to many physicians for whom one of the biggest challenges that they face in their daily practices is treating obesity however while keto diets have a proven track record in tackling obesity some concerns remain many of these likely relate to a `` broad lack of knowledge about the physiological mechanisms involved '' mechanisms of insulin resistance not clear the new study helps plug some of this knowledge gap it suggests that insulin resistance in the liver can develop in the early stages of keto diets this now needs to be confirmed in humans also the underlying mechanisms that lead to insulin resistance are still unclear especially in relation to different diets this also needs to be explored further say the researchers another area that needs further research is the effect on the brain of the byproducts of fatty acid breakdown the researchers theory is that the fatty acid byproducts might have important `` signaling roles '' in the brain '' although ketogenic diets are known to be healthy our findings indicate that there may be an increased risk of insulin resistance with this type of diet that may lead to type 2 diabetes '' christian wolfrumby probing the effect that vitamin d3 has on the cells that make up the lining of blood vessels scientists at ohio university in athens oh have identified for the first time the role that the `` sunshine vitamin '' plays in preserving cardiovascular health the sunshine vitamin has been shown to preserve heart health in a paper published in the international journal of nanomedicine they describe how they used nanosensors and a cell model to identify the molecular mechanisms that vitamin d3 can trigger in the endothelium which is the thin layer of tissue that lines blood vessels it was previously believed that the endothelium served no other purpose than to act as an inert `` wrapper '' of the vascular system allowing both water and electrolytes to pass in and out of the bloodstream however advances over the past 30 years have revealed that the endothelium acts more like an organ that lines the whole of the circulatory system from the `` heart to the smallest capillaries '' and whose cells carry out many unique biological functions changes to the endothelium have been linked to several serious health problems including high blood pressure insulin resistance diabetes tumor growth virus infections and atherosclerosis which is a condition wherein fatty deposits can build up inside arteries and increase the risk of heart attack and stroke vitamin d3 has role beyond bone health the new study suggests that vitamin d3 a version of vitamin d that our bodies produce naturally when we expose our skin to the sun plays a key role in preserving and restoring the damage to the endothelium that occurs in these diseases some other natural sources of vitamin d3 include egg yolks and oily fish it is also obtainable in the form of supplements vitamin d3 is already wellknown for its role in bone health '' however '' explains senior author tadeusz malinski a professor in the department of chemistry and biochemistry `` in recent years in clinical settings people recognize that many patients who have a heart attack will have a deficiency of d3 '' '' it doesnt mean that the deficiency caused the heart attack '' he adds `` but it increased the risk of heart attack '' nanosensors probed effect of d3 on cells for their study prof malinski and colleagues developed a measuring system using nanosensors or tiny probes that are 1000 times smaller than the thickness of human hair and can operate at the level of atoms and molecules they used the nanosensors to track the impact of vitamin d3 on molecular mechanisms in human endothelial cells that had been treated to show the same type of damage that occurs from high blood pressure blood vessel discovery may prevent diabetes a new microscopy technique reveals that the transport of insulin across the endothelium differs to that suggested previously read now the findings suggest that vitamin d3 is a powerful trigger of nitric oxide which is a molecule that plays an important signaling role in the control of blood flow and the formation of blood clots in blood vessels the researchers also found that vitamin d3 significantly reduces oxidative stress in the vascular system they note that their study `` provides direct molecular insight to previously published observations that have suggested that vitamin d3 deficiencyinduced hypertension is associated with vascular oxidative stress '' the effects of vitamin d3 were similar in both caucasian and african american endothelial cells could d3 reverse cardiovascular damage the study authors note that while their findings came from tests performed on a cellular model of high blood pressure `` the implications of the influence of vitamin d3 on dysfunctional endothelium is much broader '' they suggest that vitamin d3 has the potential to significantly reverse the damage that high blood pressure diabetes atherosclerosis and other diseases inflict on the cardiovascular system '' there are not many '' prof malinski adds `` if any known systems which can be used to restore cardiovascular endothelial cells which are already damaged and vitamin d3 can do it '' '' this is a very inexpensive solution to repair the cardiovascular system we dont have to develop a new drug we already have it '' prof tadeusz malinskisome people find it harder to lose weight than others but why is this a new study has identified a molecule in fat cells that could be to blame researchers have uncovered one reason why some people may find it hard to lose weight researchers found that the fat cells of people who are obese show higher expression of a molecule called lysyl oxidase lox lox is associated with fibrosis or `` scarring '' of fat tissue which as previous research has shown can hamper weight loss efforts study coauthor dr katarina kos who works in the diabetes and obesity research group at the university of exeter medical school in the united kingdom and colleagues recently reported their findings in the journal metabolism it is thought that around 1 in 3 adults in the united states are obese which puts them at increased risk of type 2 diabetes stroke heart disease and some forms of cancer a lack of exercise and a poor diet are the primary causes of obesity so its no surprise that eating a healthful diet and increasing physical activity are the first strategies we try in an attempt to shed the pounds but these interventions can produce mixed results some individuals see the pounds fall off while others find it much more challenging the new study may have uncovered one explanation for the latter higher lox levels in people who are obese for their study dr kos and colleagues analyzed samples of abdominal fat tissue that had been taken from obese individuals before they underwent weight loss surgery compared with abdominal fat tissue samples of leaner subjects the analysis revealed that the fat tissue of obese people had greater expression of the lox molecule which is a cause of fat tissue fibrosis on further investigation the researchers found that the increase in lox expression was driven by an increase in oxygen deprivation and inflammation in fat cells which occurs when fat cells become larger weight loss breakthrough sunlight is key researchers suggest that lack of sunlight may be to blame for winter weight gain read now the scientists explain that when fat cells undergo this type of stress they lose their ability to store excess calories as a result these calories become stored as fat around important organs such as the liver and heart and this is associated with numerous health problems including heart disease and type 2 diabetes unfortunately studies have shown that fat tissue fibrosis can make it harder for individuals to lose weight `` but this does not mean that scarring makes weight loss impossible '' dr kos emphasizes '' adding some regular activity to a somewhat reduced energy intake for a longer period makes weight loss possible and helps the fat tissue not to become further overworked '' she continues `` we know that doing this improves our blood sugar and is key in the management of diabetes '' we need to look after our fat what is more the teams findings indicate that targeting the lox molecule could be one way to prevent fat cell fibrosis and possibly make weight loss easier but more studies are needed to confirm this theory dr kos notes that further research is also needed in order to identify other ways to prevent fat tissue fibrosis in the meantime she says that increasing our physical activity could help '' there is evidence that once fat tissue becomes scarred despite weight loss it may not recover fully '' she says `` we need to look after our fat tissue which can cease to cope if it is overworked when being forced to absorb more and more calories '' '' as a clinician '' dr kos concludes `` i would advise exercise or at least a walk after a meal which can make a great difference to our metabolic health ''its likely that we all enjoy a hot cup of tea or herbal infusion at least from time to time if not on a daily basis but what are the most important health benefits that some of these soothing teas can bring us read on to learn more about the top teas for our health some teas and herbal infusions have long been appreciated for their alleged health benefits but what does research have to say '' tea began as a medicine and grew into a beverage '' writes 19thcentury japanese scholar okakura kakuzo in his infamous publication the book of tea in it he speaks at length about the history of tea and the philosophy of the traditional japanese tea ceremony kakuzo was correct modern research about the history of teadrinking in the world confirms that this beverage was originally consumed less for pleasure or as a mindfulness aid calling for the drinker to take slow sips and be in the moment instead as shown by prof victor henry mair from the university of pennsylvania in philadelphia in the true history of tea early in its history the tea plant camellia sinensis became popular for its medicinal properties the tea plants main varieties camellia sinensis sinensis and camellia sinensis assamica are responsible for most of the tea brews that we are accustomed to black tea green tea white tea and oolong tea there are many other types of teas and infusions using various other plants such as aspalathus linearis which is better known as `` rooibos '' or `` redbush '' in this spotlight well give you an overview of the top five teas that can benefit your health 1 green tea a favorite with tea drinkers everywhere green tea has been praised for its medicinal properties for years some recent studies have now confirmed some of these benefits suggesting that green tea may protect various aspects of our health green tea can increase cognitive functioning to begin with this beverage has been found to enhance cognitive functioning with one study connecting it to better working memory the type of we use on a daytoday basis researchers from the university hospital of basel in switzerland found that healthy people who agreed to consume a soft drink containing 275 grams of green tea extract exhibited more intense activity in brain areas linked to working memory therefore participants who had ingested the green tea extract had better connectivity between the frontal and parietal lobes of the brain which are two regions involved in aspects of learning memory processes and decisionmaking the health benefits brought about by green tea have been linked with their content of polyphenols which are micronutrients with antioxidant properties as antioxidants these substances can protect against the action of free radicals which induce the type of cellular damage consistent with aging a 2017 study that was published in the journal of the american chemical society found that one such polyphenol found in green tea called epigallocatechin gallate may lower the risk of alzheimers disease by interacting with the `` building blocks '' that form betaamyloid plaques a buildup of these plaques in the brain is typical of this condition and impairs brain cell signaling epigallocatechin gallate this study suggests could stop betaamyloid from forming into plaques potentially helping to keep alzheimers at bay this same green tea polyphenol has also been said to slow down the growth of tumor cells of certain types of cancer such as pancreatic cancer research that was led by the los angeles biomedical research institute in california has shown that epigallocatechin gallate can disrupt the metabolism of pancreatic cancer cells thereby impairing their growth 2 jasmine tea what we refer to as `` jasmine tea '' is a type of beverage that usually has green tea at its base to which jasmine flowers are added for an enriched aroma jasmine tea is an important component of the diet of one of the longestliving populations in the world but the benefits of jasmine tea arent solely due to the antioxidant effects of the tea plant since jasmine blooms also bring their own medicinal properties to the mix in the book ikigai the japanese secret to a long and happy life authors héctor garcía and francesc miralles note that the inhabitants of a healthy longlived community in the okinawa prefecture of japan are avid drinkers of sanpincha a special blend of green tea and jasmine '' okinawans drink more sanpincha a mix of green tea and jasmine flowers than any other kind of tea '' they write suggesting that this blend may play a role in keeping the inhabitants of okinawa healthy and mentally agile well into old age this may be because like the tea plant jasmine flowers contain antioxidants which may protect cells from agerelated damage what are the best foods to fight aging read about the top five foods that will help you to stay young in body and mind read now jasmine itself has been linked with improved physical wellbeing and is said to reduce the impact of stress that is why some researchers have experimented with compounds derived from this plant in the search of better therapies for instance prof eliezer flescher from tel aviv university in israel noticed that methyl jasmonate which is a compound obtained from jasmonic acid found in the jasmine plant induces the death of cervical cancer cells and if you happen to enjoy drinking jasmine tea simply because you love the way it smells theres actually a good reason for that research that was published in the european journal of applied physiology explained that the smell of jasmine tea is soothing able to calm nerves and able to help regulate mood 3 rooibos tea another type of tea with antioxidant properties is rooibos or `` redbush tea '' which is prepared from the aspalathus linearis plant native to south africa rooibos tea may protect liver health research has suggested that the antioxidant effects of rooibos are similar to if not quite as strong as those of green tea a recent study on the rat model has suggested that the antioxidants in rooibos tea may protect the liver from oxidative stress helping to render this organ more resilient to induced damage the researchers who conducted the study noted that their findings suggest that rooibos tea or rooibosderived dietary supplements may offer a useful health boost '' results from this study suggest that the daily intake of unfermented rooibos herbal tea or a derived commercial rooibos supplement may benefit human health by providing the liver with an enhanced antioxidant capacity to reduce damage induced by toxicants '' moreover rooibos has also been cited as helpful in lowering blood pressure and relaxing tense muscles suggesting that the active ingredient in this instance might be one of the flavonoids pigments that it contains chrysoeriol unlike green or black tea rooibos does not contain any caffeine so it wont have the same stimulating effects this makes it safe to drink well into the evening 4 hibiscus tea those of you who enjoy the refreshing taste of a more sour brew may also be familiar with herbal infusions of hibiscus a plant whose flowers can be used not just to make invigorating beverages but also to give a subtle `` punch '' to salads or as an elegant garnish for sophisticated dishes hibiscus tea is an antioxidant and may bring cardiovascular benefits the most commonly used variety is hibiscus sabdariffa also known as the `` roselle '' for the tea or more correctly `` tisane '' herbal tea its calyces are typically used although other parts of the plant such as the leaves seeds and roots are safe for consumption studies have suggested that extracts from the hibiscus calyx and hibiscus leaves have antioxidant and antitumoral effects therefore they may protect against the aging action of free radicals at a cellular level as well as fight certain types of leukemia cells hibiscus tea has also been tied to cardiovascular benefits helping to regulate systolic and diastolic blood pressure that is blood pressure during and inbetween heart beats respectively though not so commonly used to brew tea hibiscus leaves have also been linked repeatedly to a wide array of health benefits thus the polyphenols in hibiscus leaves may help to induce tumor cell death in skin cancer according to a 2015 study another study from the same year also argued that hibiscus leaf extracts could inhibit the action of prostate cancer cells 5 lemon verbena tea another herbal tea whose medicinal properties are getting increasingly recognized is that made out of lemon verbena scientifically dubbed aloysia citrodora infusions with lemon verbena are said to help with weight management it is the citrusflavored cousin of a betterknown plant that has been used in herbal infusions for years verbena or vervain verbena officinalis infusions made with lemon verbena are great for those who like me prefer a subtler citrusy aroma in their hot drinks rather than the strong lemony flavor of commonly commercialized citrus tea blends the first time that i came upon this plant sold as a tisane herb was in a local organic shop that was selling it as `` weight loss tea '' in fact studies have shown that the polyphenols in this plant can decrease the formation of fatty acids marking its potential use in the treatment of obesityrelated health issues researchers have also suggested that lemon verbena extracts may help to lower inflammatory markers levels in the blood of some people with multiple sclerosis '' results demonstrate that supplementation with lemon verbena extracts may affect the cytokine inflammation markers profile depending on the clinical subtype '' the study authors conclude having a cup of your tea or tisane of choice may be a pleasant way to carve out some selfindulgence time and stimulate your bodily and mental wellbeing in a subtle way but always keep in mind that as the saying goes `` one swallow does not a summer make '' and the most potent health benefits are best reaped by leading a healthful wholesome lifestyle we picked linked items based on the quality of products and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you we partner with some of the companies that sell these products which means healthline uk and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a links aboveheart disease is still the number one killer in the united states in this spotlight we outline 16 foods that when consumed as part of a wellrounded diet might help to keep your heart healthy how can you improve your heart health with food there are many things you can do to help keep your heart healthy and diseasefree you can schedule an annual checkup exercise daily quit smoking or take steps to reduce the level of stress in your life all of these things can have a positive effect on heart health but one of the simplest lifestyle changes that will benefit your heart is watching what you eat nearly 6 million people are currently living with heart failure and around half of these will die within 5 years of being diagnosed the centers for disease control and prevention cdc warn that eating foods high in fat cholesterol or sodium can be very bad for the heart so when taking steps to minimize the risk of heart disease diet is a good place to start in this article we examine some of the best foods for ensuring that you keep a robust and healthy heart 1 asparagus asparagus is a natural source of folate which helps to prevent an amino acid called homocysteine from building up in the body high homocysteine levels have been linked with an increased risk of heartrelated conditions such as coronary artery disease and stroke 2 beans peas chickpeas and lentils beans peas chickpeas and lentils otherwise known as pulses or legumes can all significantly reduce levels of lowdensity lipoprotein ldl or `` bad cholesterol '' they are also packed with fiber protein and antioxidant polyphenols all of which have beneficial effects on the heart and general health 3 berries berries are also full of antioxidant polyphenols which help to reduce heart disease risk berries are a great source of fiber folate iron calcium vitamin a and vitamin c and they are low in fat 4 broccoli some studies suggest that regularly eating steamed broccoli can lower cholesterol levels and prevent heart disease 5 chia seeds and flaxseeds these seeds are a rich plantbased source of omega3 fatty acids such as alphalinolenic acid omega3s have many beneficial effects such as helping to lower levels of triglycerides ldl and total cholesterol they also reduce blood pressure and minimize the buildup of fatty plaques in the arteries omega3s decrease the risk of disorders that can lead to heart attack such as thrombosis and arrhythmias 6 dark chocolate dark chocolate is a rare example of a food that tastes amazing and is good for you in moderation dark chocolate delicious and hearthealthy scientists now believe that dark chocolate has protective benefits against atherosclerosis which is when plaque builds up inside the arteries increasing risk of heart attack and stroke dark chocolate seems to prevent two of the mechanisms implicated in atherosclerosis stiffness of the arteries and white blood cell adhesion which is when white blood cells stick to the walls of blood vessels what is more studies have found that increasing dark chocolates flavanol content which is the compound that makes it tasty and moreish does not diminish these protective benefits 7 coffee also in the `` almost too good to be true '' camp is coffee one recent study found that regularly drinking coffee was linked with a decreased risk of developing heart failure and stroke however it is important to bear in mind that this study which used machine learning to assess data from the framingham heart study can only observe an association between factors and can not conclusively identify cause and effect could coffee stop clogged arteries consuming more than three cups of coffee every day may lower the risk of atherosclerosis read now 8 fish high in omega3s fish is a strong source of hearthelping omega3 fatty acids and protein but it is low in saturated fat people who have heart disease or are at risk of developing it are often recommended to increase their intake of omega3s by eating fish this is because they lower the risk of abnormal heartbeats and slow the growth of plaque in the arteries according to the american heart association aha we should eat a 35ounce serving of fatty fish such as salmon mackerel herring lake trout sardines or albacore tuna at least twice per week 9 green tea a 2011 systematic review found that drinking green tea is associated with a small reduction in cholesterol which as we know is a main contributor to heart disease and stroke but the review could not pinpoint how much green tea someone would have to drink to receive any health benefits in 2014 another review studied the effects of drinking green tea on people with high blood pressure the report concluded that green tea was associated with a reduction in blood pressure but the authors were unable to determine if this modest reduction could help to prevent heart disease 10 nuts almonds hazelnuts peanuts pecans pistachios and walnuts are all hearthealthy nut options these nuts are full of protein fiber minerals vitamins and antioxidants like fish and flaxseeds walnuts are also ripe with omega3 fatty acids making them a hearthealthy snack to have on the go 11 liver of all the organ meats liver is the most nutrientdense in particular liver is bulging with folic acid iron chromium copper and zinc which increase the bloods hemoglobin level and help to keep our heart healthy 12 oatmeal because oatmeal is rich in soluble fiber it may help to reduce the risk of heart disease a 2008 review of the evidence concluded that oatbased products significantly reduce ldl and total cholesterol without any adverse effects 13 red wine sort of many studies have noted the potential health benefits of the antioxidants in red wine however it is unlikely that the benefits of the antioxidants outweigh the dangers of alcohol red wine contains beneficial antioxidants but bear in mind that it should only be consumed in moderation recently however a new study proposed that these same antioxidants could form the basis of a new stent for use during angioplasty the process where narrow or obstructed veins are widened to treat atherosclerosis the researchers behind that study are currently developing a new kind of stent that releases red winelike antioxidants into the blood to promote healing prevent blood clotting and reduce inflammation during angioplasty it is worth noting that drinking alcohol in general is not healthy for your heart in fact it is vitally important for cardiovascular health to drink alcohol in moderation if at all 14 spinach you can help to maintain a healthy heart rhythm by regularly consuming good sources of magnesium spinach is one of the best sources of dietary magnesium and consumption of popeyes favorite food is associated with a raft of health benefits 15 tomatoes tomatoes have lots of nutrients that might help keep our hearts healthy the little red fruits are chockfull of fiber potassium vitamin c folate and choline which are all good for the heart as well as helping to keep heart disease at bay potassium benefits muscles and bones and helps prevent kidney stones from forming scientists have argued that increasing potassium intake while decreasing sodium intake is the most important dietary change when attempting to reduce the risk of heart disease 16 vegetables the aha advise that we eat eight or more servings of fruit and vegetables each day vegetables are low in fat and calories but rich in fiber minerals and vitamins a healthful amount of veggies in the diet can help to moderate weight and blood pressureinsights from a new study by the university of cambridge in the united kingdom about the role of calcium in brain cells signaling mechanisms brings us closer to understanding the causes of parkinsons disease having excess calcium in the brain may be a reason for why parkinsons disease develops the presence of toxic protein deposits or lewy bodies inside brain cells is a recognized hallmark of parkinsons disease the deposits contain clusters of alphasynuclein and other proteins that have folded into the wrong shape the new study now published in the journal nature communications shows that calcium affects the way in which alphasynuclein binds to synaptic vesicles synaptic vesicles are small compartments in nerve terminals that hold the neurotransmitters or chemical messengers that carry signals between brain cells '' there is a fine balance '' notes cofirst author dr amberley stephens a postdoctoral researcher in molecular neuroscience at the university of cambridge `` of calcium and alphasynuclein in the cell and when there is too much of one or the other the balance is tipped and aggregation begins leading to parkinsons disease '' normal vs abnormal alphasynuclein worldwide there are more than 10 million people living with parkinsons disease including around 1 million in the united states in parkinsons disease there is a progressive destruction of brain cells that produce a neurotransmitter called dopamine which is important for controlling movement therefore as the disease progresses there will be a worsening of symptoms such as slowness of movement rigidity tremor and impaired coordination and balance could an existing drug halt parkinsons disease learn how a drug for a rare genetic disorder may be effective against toxic alphasynuclein clusters in brain cells read now more recent studies have revealed that parkinsons also affects brain cells that do not produce dopamine which might explain why some of the symptoms are not movementrelated although abnormal clusters of alphasynuclein a small protein comprising only 140 amino acids is a major element of the lewy bodies that are present in parkinsons disease its normal form appears to be necessary for a number of brain cell functions however apart from knowing that the protein somehow interacts with synaptic vesicles to ensure the smooth transport of molecules across the synapse or the gap between the nerve terminal and the next cell we know little about the underlying mechanism alphasynuclein acts like a calcium sensor '' alphasynuclein '' notes senior study author dr gabriele kaminski schierle of the department of chemical engineering and biotechnology at the university of cambridge `` is a very small protein with very little structure and it needs to interact with other proteins or structures in order to become functional which has made it difficult to study '' advances in microscope technology mean that researchers can now observe what happens inside cells dr kaminski schierle and colleagues used `` superresolution microscopy '' and `` isolated synaptic vesicles '' to examine the detailed behavior of alphasynuclein they found that when the level of calcium rises in the cell alphasynuclein binds to vesicles at more than one point which causes the vesicles to cluster '' we think '' explains cofirst author dr janin lautenschläger also of the department of chemical engineering and biotechnology `` that alphasynuclein is almost like a calcium sensor '' '' in the presence of calcium '' she continues `` it changes its structure and how it interacts with its environment which is likely very important for its normal function '' a delicate balance the authors propose that the abnormal clusters of alphasynuclein form when the delicate balance between the protein and calcium is upset they suggest a number of things that might cause such an imbalance such as agerelated slowing of the elimination of excess protein doubling of alphasynuclein production due to gene duplication higher calcium levels in brain cells vulnerable to parkinsons inability to buffer calcium effectively in parkinsonssensitive cells a more detailed understanding of how alphasynuclein behaves in both health and disease should lead to muchneeded new drugs for parkinsons disease the authors conclude they also note that a drug that blocks the calcium channel in heart disease might `` prove to be a valuable candidate to act against parkinsons disease via lowering intracellular calcium load '' '' this is the first time weve seen that calcium influences the way alphasynuclein interacts with synaptic vesicles '' dr janin lautenschlägertwo new studies confirm the hypothesis that the psychoactive compound found in `` magic mushrooms '' may be a useful new treatment for depression avoiding some of the side effects of conventional antidepressants magic mushrooms or shrooms may hold surprising benefits for our mental health at medical news today we have reported on a range of studies that pointed to psilocybin the psychoactive substance in `` magic mushrooms '' as a potential remedy for depression two such studies showed that the psychoactive compound can reduce feelings of anxiety and depression in people with advanced cancer while another small trial suggested that the compound could succeed where previous depression treatment has failed treating depression can be challenging not only because some depression types are treatmentresistant but also because existing therapies have a range of unwanted side effects one such adverse effect frequently reported by people living with depression is the `` emotional blunting '' indifference or apathy that comes with taking antidepressants a new study which was carried out by researchers at imperial college london icl in the united kingdom suggests that magic mushrooms could treat depression while avoiding these side effects the new research consists of two studies both of which were led by leor roseman a member of the psychedelic research group at icl participants felt emotionally reconnected in the first study published in the journal neuropharmacology 20 people diagnosed with moderate to severe depression that conventional treatment had not alleviated participated in two dosing sessions with the magic mushroom compound using functional mri fmri the team scanned the brains of the participants while they looked at pictures of emotive expressions the scans were taken before and after each drug intervention in order to assess the impact of the treatment on depression the subjects were all provided with psychological support before during and after the intervention after the treatment the participants reported feeling better `` emotionally reconnected and accepting '' the fmri scans also revealed a stronger brain response to emotive faces specifically the scientists saw more activity in the brains amygdala which is an emotionprocessing area associated with depression the study authors explain '' based on the present results we propose that psilocybin with psychological support is a treatment approach that potentially revives emotional responsiveness in depression enabling patients to reconnect with their emotions '' roseman comments on the new findings saying that they `` are important as they reveal biological changes after psilocybin therapy and more specifically they suggest that increased emotional processing is crucial for the treatment to work '' but the authors also caution that more research is needed to establish firmly whether the positive effects were due to the psychoactive compound itself the psychological counseling or the interruption of the antidepressant treatment the subjects had been on before the study '' having a healthy control group in future studies should be helpful in answering some of these questions '' roseman admits mystical experience improves efficacy the second paper published in the journal frontiers in pharmacology examined whether or not the quality of the psychedelic experience was linked with the success of the treatment roseman and colleagues gave questionnaires to another group of 20 volunteers who underwent two treatment sessions with psilocybin what to know about avoiding depression here are seven tips that may help you to avoid a depression relapse read now the researchers looked at the socalled feeling of oceanic boundlessness which is a `` mysticaltype experience '' involving feelings of unity and a lack of boundaries between the self and the universe the study revealed that the more strongly the participants felt this experience the better was their mental health in the longterm depressive symptoms subsided and the mental benefits lasted for weeks after the treatment in participants who reported a strong mystical experience '' future therapeutic work with psychedelics may consider investigating ways which enhance mysticaltype experience and reduce anxiety given the growing evidence that this serves the efficacy of the treatment model '' conclude the authors directions for future research the researchers are planning on carrying out larger trials with a healthy control group in which the effects of psilocybin could be compared with an existing antidepressant '' we also want to investigate how the amygdala responds a longer time after treatment '' roseman adds `` which will inform us about longerterm effects compared to the first study which was only looked at 1 day after the therapy '' additionally in light of the findings of their second study the group recommends that future trials with psychedelics should aim to enhance the `` mystical '' aspect of the experiencehiv therapy involves a combination of drugs that must be taken once or twice daily making treatment adherence challenging for many people but researchers may have found a solution to this problem in the form of a pill that only needs to be taken once per week researchers have developed a pill for hiv that would only need to be taken once weekly researchers from the massachusetts institute of technology mit and brigham and womens hospital both located in boston ma have developed an ingestible capsule that can slowly release 1 weeks worth of antiretroviral drugs the teams novel creation has the potential to transform hiv therapy as it means that people may only need to take a single pill once every week rather than multiple medications every day colead study author robert langer the david h koch institute professor at mit and his colleagues believe that their `` pillbox in a capsule '' could combat the current problem of adherence to antiretroviral therapy research has indicated that up to 30 percent of people with hiv fail to stick to their treatment regimen langer and his colleagues recently reported the details of their new creation in the journal nature communications hiv and antiretroviral therapy hiv is a virus that attacks and destroys immune cells that are important for staving off infection and disease if left untreated hiv can progress to aids wherein a persons immune system is so severely damaged that they become vulnerable to serious illnesses in 2016 there were around 367 million people across the globe living with hiv or aids of these individuals around 18 million were newly infected hiv could new injection work as effectively as daily drugs researchers suggest that a new antiretroviral injection may be just as effective as daily medications for hiv read now just 30 years ago hiv was considered by many as a death sentence today the virus can be successfully managed with antiretroviral drugs which work by reducing the level of hiv in the body a combination of different antiretroviral drugs must be taken every day in order for treatment to be successful but patients can find it hard to stick to such a regimen '' one of the main barriers to treating and preventing hiv is adherence '' notes the studys coauthor giovanni traverso of the mits koch institute for integrative cancer research `` the ability to make doses less frequent stands to improve adherence and make a significant impact at the patient level '' '' these slowrelease dosage systems perform equal or better than the current daily doses for hiv treatment in preclinical models '' he adds building the pillbox in a capsule with this in mind the researchers decided to build on an idea that first emerged in 2016 which was an ingestible capsule that could remain in the stomach for 2 weeks and deliver drugs in a previous study langer and his colleagues demonstrated how the capsule could help to treat malaria by slowly releasing controlled doses of the malaria drug ivermectin for their latest study the team looked at whether the capsule could be effective for the treatment of hiv but some design changes were required the original capsule consisted of six arms made of a single strong polymer each arm was loaded with drugs and folded in after ingestion the arms folded out and released the drugs for the treatment of hiv however the capsule would need to be able to release different drugs at different rates something that the original design did not allow as such the team adapted the design the main structure of the new capsule is still built from a single strong polymer but each of the six arms can hold a different medication thanks to the addition of `` release polymers '' '' in a way its like putting a pillbox in a capsule now you have chambers for every day of the week on a single capsule '' says traverso pill effective in pigs to test whether the newly designed capsule could be effective against hiv the researchers loaded it with three different antiretroviral drugs dolutegravir rilpivirine and cabotegravir that are currently used to both prevent and treat hiv on testing the drugloaded capsule on pigs the researchers found that the capsule successfully settled in the animals stomachs and they gradually released each of the three drugs over a 1week period once all of the drugs are released the capsule disintegrates allowing it to be passed through the gastrointestinal tract of course the capsule needs to be tested in humans before it can be used for the prevention and treatment of hiv but the researchers believe that their study results show promise the researchers calculated the potential impact of this onceaweek capsule at population level and they suggest that the pill could boost preventive treatment efficacy for hiv by 20 percent also approximately 200000–800000 new hiv infections could be prevented in south africa over the next 20 years commenting on the findings anthony fauci director of the national institute of allergy and infectious disease which helped to fund the study says `` a longeracting less invasive oral formulation could be one important part of our future arsenal to stop the hivaids pandemic '' '' new and improved tools for hiv treatment and prevention along with wider implementation of novel and existing approaches are needed to end the hiv pandemic as we know it studies such as this help us move closer to achieving this goal '' anthony fauciscientists experimenting with an innovative treatment for cancer have now devised a targeted injection that has already successfully eliminated tumors in mice could one shot administered directly to a solid tumor mark the end of cancer research devising more effective treatments for all types of cancer has been abundant over the past few years offering new hope all the time some of the most recent experiments include using stateoftheart nanotechnology to hunt down microtumors engineering microbes to thwart cancer cells and starving malignant tumors to death the latest study from stanford university school of medicine in california has investigated the potential of yet another approach injecting `` minute '' amounts of two agents that stimulate the bodys immune response directly into a malignant solid tumor so far their studies using mice have proven successful `` when we use these two agents together '' explains senior study author dr ronald levy `` we see the elimination of tumors all over the body '' '' this approach bypasses the need to identify tumorspecific immune targets and doesnt require wholesale activation of the immune system or customization of a patients immune cells '' dr ronald levy moreover the researchers have reason to believe in a speedier trajectory toward clinical trials for this method since one of the agents involved has already been approved for use in human therapy while the other is already under clinical trial for lymphoma treatment the studys findings were published yesterday in the journal science translational medicine onetime application of formula dr levy specializes in the use of immunotherapy which is a type of treatment wherein the bodys immune response is enhanced so that it can target cancer cells to fight lymphoma or cancer of the lymphatic system there are several types of immunotherapy including some that boost the entire immune system of the body and others that are a lot more targeted but the researchers note they all come with caveats attached crossdressing cells may improve cancer treatment what are `` crossdressing '' cells and how could they help us to fight cancer read now they may have problematic side effects be timeconsuming or be simply too costly the teams method however arguably has more benefits even beyond its potential effectiveness as a treatment '' our approach uses a onetime application of very small amounts of two agents to stimulate the immune cells only within the tumor itself '' dr levy explains this method can `` teach '' immune cells how to fight against that specific type of cancer which then allows them to migrate and destroy all other existing tumors although the immune systems role is to detect and eliminate harmful foreign bodies many types of cancer cell are able to evade detection in complex ways which enables them to grow and spread a type of white blood cell called t cells play a vital role in regulating the bodys immune response normally t cells would target and fight cancer tumors but all too often cancer cells learn to `` trick '' them and escape the immune response effective against many types of cancer in the new study dr levy and his team delivered micrograms of two specific agents into one hard tumor site in each of the affected mice the agents in question were cpg oligonucleotide a short stretch of synthetic dna that boosts the immune cells ability to express a receptor called ox40 which is found on the surface of t cells an antibody that binds to the receptor activating the t cells once the t cells are activated some of them migrate to other parts of the body `` hunting down '' and destroying other tumors importantly dr levy and his colleagues note that this method could be used to target a number of different kinds of cancer in each case the t cells will `` learn '' to deal with the specific type of cancer cell that they have been exposed to in the laboratory the scientists first applied this method to the mouse model of lymphoma and 87 out of 90 mice became cancerfree in the other three cases the tumors did recur but they disappeared when the researchers administered the treatment a second time similarly successful results were observed in the mouse model of breast colon and skin cancer also even the mice that were genetically engineered to develop breast cancer spontaneously responded well to this method of treatment a targeted approach however when scientists transplanted two different types of cancer tumor lymphoma and colon cancer in the same animal but only injected the experimental formula into a lymphoma site the results were mixed all the lymphoma tumors did recede but the same did not hold true for the colon cancer tumor confirming that the t cells only learn to deal with the cancer cells that were in their immediate vicinity before the injection as dr levy continues `` this is a very targeted approach only the tumor that shares the protein targets displayed by the treated site is affected were attacking specific targets without having to identify exactly what proteins the t cells are recognizing '' currently the team is preparing a clinical trial to test the effectiveness of this treatment in people with lowgrade lymphoma dr levy hopes that if the clinical trial is successful they will be able to extend this therapy to virtually any kind of cancer tumor in humans '' i dont think theres a limit to the type of tumor we could potentially treat as long as it has been infiltrated by the immune system '' dr levy concludesthe american college of physicians have now published their new guidelines regarding the desired blood sugar control levels for people with type 2 diabetes the recommendations aim to change current therapeutic practices and doctors should aim for a moderate level of blood sugar when treating their patients blood sugar control levels should be moderate for people living with type 2 diabetes according to new guidelines according to the most recent estimates almost 30 million people in the united states have type 2 diabetes which amounts to over 9 percent of the entire us population once diagnosed with type 2 diabetes patients are often advised to take what is known as a glycated hemoglobin hba1c test in order to keep blood sugar levels under control the test averages a persons blood sugar levels over the past 2 or 3 months with an hba1c score of 65 percent indicating diabetes patients who score over 65 percent would then be prescribed a daily insulin based treatment which they can inject themselves rapidacting injections take effect within 5 to 15 minutes but last for a shorter time of 3 to 5 hours longacting injections take effect after 1 or 2 hours and last for between 14 and 24 hours but some studies have pointed out that the hba1c test may currently be overused in the us and they have suggested that such overtesting may lead to overtreating patients with hypoglycemic drugs these drugs often have a range of side effects such as gastrointestinal problems excessively low blood sugar weight gain and even congestive heart failure additionally as some researchers have pointed out `` excessive testing contributes to the growing problem of waste in healthcare and increased patient burden in diabetes management '' in this context the american college of physicians acp set out to examine the existing guidelines from several organizations and the evidence available in an effort to help physicians make better more informed decisions about treating people with type 2 diabetes their guidelines were published in the journal annals of internal medicine an a1c of 7 to 8 percent is recommended as the acp explain the current rationale behind the existing recommendations of a score of 65 percent or below 7 percent is that keeping blood sugar this low would decrease the risk of microvascular complications over time however the acp found that the evidence for such a reduction is `` inconsistent '' as dr jack ende the president of acp puts it `` our analysis of the evidence behind existing guidelines found that treatment with drugs to targets of 7 percent or less compared to targets of about 8 percent did not reduce deaths or macrovascular complications such as heart attack or stroke but did result in substantial harms '' how can you lower your blood sugar levels here are some alternative ways to reduce your blood sugar levels read now he continues saying `` the evidence shows that for most people with type 2 diabetes achieving an a1c between 7 percent and 8 percent will best balance longterm benefits with harms such as low blood sugar medication burden and costs '' additionally the acp recommend that patients who are 80 years old and above or who live with chronic illnesses such as dementia cancer or congestive heart failure receive a treatment that focuses on reducing high blood sugarrelated symptoms instead of lowering hba1c levels the reason for this is that for patients in this category the potential side effects of hypoglycemic drugs outweigh the advantages '' results from studies included in all the guidelines demonstrate that health outcomes are not improved by treating to a1c levels below 65 percent '' dr ende explains '' however reducing drug interventions for patients with a1c levels persistently below 65 percent '' he continues `` will reduce unnecessary medication harms burdens and costs without negatively impacting the risk of death heart attacks strokes kidney failure amputations visual impairment or painful neuropathy '' '' although acps guidance statement focuses on drug therapy to control blood sugar a lower treatment target is appropriate if it can be achieved with diet and lifestyle modifications such as exercise dietary changes and weight loss '' dr jack endeas much of the world experiences a recordbreaking heat wave this spotlight turns its attention to vitamin d the socalled sunshine vitamin here we inspect the latest research the `` sunshine vitamin '' has a range of surprising benefits vitamin d is a hot topic currently with a raft of studies proclaiming its benefits for a variety of serious conditions conversely other recent studies have been more cautious questioning its perceived usefulness for treating some illnesses vitamin d is a nutrient that is synthesized in our skin when it is exposed to sunlight and it is also present in some foods sunlight is the best source of vitamin d but in the winter months the national institutes of health nih recommend topping up vitamin d levels by eating vitamin dcontaining foods each day these include oily fish fortified milk beef liver egg yolks mushrooms and fortified breakfast cereals what does vitamin d do scientists know that vitamin d is essential for many aspects of maintaining good health and that deficiency is linked with problems for both physical and mental health perhaps most notably vitamin d helps to regulate the levels of calcium in our bodies strengthening our bones and preventing boneweakening conditions such as osteoporosis increasingly though studies are also suggesting that vitamin d might have protective benefits against heart failure diabetes cancer respiratory tract infections autoimmune disease and even hair loss a surprisingly large number of people have insufficient levels of vitamin d for instance according to one study more than 40 percent of adults in the united states are deficient because of its prevalence it is important to determine what the public health implications of this epidemic might be symptoms of vitamin d deficiency can vary between individuals but they typically include pain in the joints muscles or bones fatigue breathing problems and low mood or seasonal affective disorder sad below we run through a number of intriguing recent studies that investigate associations between vitamin d and an assortment of illnesses vitamin d and heart failure several studies have suggested that vitamin d could offer protective benefits against cardiovascular illness but scientists have yet to pinpoint what mechanisms are driving this association recently though medical news today reported on a study that used a mouse model to investigate how a type of vitamin d called 125dihydroxyvitamin d3 affects heart cells in particular the researchers looked at the cells responsible for developing scar tissue following a heart attack called cardiac colonyforming unit fibroblasts ccfufs ccfufs are an important area of study because when heart tissue is scarred the heart has a harder time pumping blood which can lead to heart failure the researchers behind the study found that vitamin d inhibited the action of ccfufs which prevented scar tissue from building around the hearts of the mice in the study potentially preventing blockages in the cardiovascular system '' with further study '' wrote the authors `` vitamin d could prove to be an exciting lowcost addition to current treatments and we hope to progress these findings into clinical trials for humans '' vitamin d and cancer breast cancer and bowel cancer have both been linked with cases of vitamin d deficiency in recent studies one of these analyzed data from two randomized clinical trials and a prospective cohort study the researchers found that high levels of vitamin d were inversely associated with risk of breast cancer among women who were cancerfree at baseline studies suggest that vitamin d impacts breast cancer risk according to the study results the higher the levels of vitamin d the lower the risk of breast cancer this relationship remained significant even after the results were adjusted for confounding factors such as age body mass index bmi intake of calcium supplements and smoking habits although a link between vitamin d deficiency and colorectal cancer has previously been reported not all studies have been able to replicate these findings a new largescale study attempted to settle this by drawing on data from three continents including 5700 colorectal cancer cases and 7100 controls antifungal drug kills dormant colorectal cancer cells new research suggests that an existing antifungal drug could be effective against particularly persistent colorectal cancer cells read now the researchers calculated that people whose levels of vitamin d fall below those specified in the current guidelines have a 31 percent increased risk of developing bowel cancer by contrast those with vitamin d levels above the current recommended levels were 22 percent less likely to develop this cancer vitamin d and belly fat another recent study examined a previously observed link between obesity and lower levels of vitamin d focusing in particular on how different types of body fat might interact with vitamin d the study authors reported that having excess belly fat was linked with lower levels of vitamin d '' the strong relationship between increasing amounts of abdominal fat and lower levels of vitamin d suggests that individuals with larger waistlines are at a greater risk of developing deficiency and should consider having their vitamin d levels checked '' however the study was not able to prove whether a deficiency in vitamin d causes fat to be stored around the belly or if having belly fat somehow contributes to a deficiency in vitamin d the researchers say that future studies will attempt to determine cause and effect in this relationship vitamin d and alzheimers disease a systematic review from researchers in australia recently attempted to settle the debate surrounding vitamin ds ability to protect against alzheimers the systematic review analyzed more than 70 studies looking at the association they concluded that there was no significant association between vitamin d deficiency and risk of alzheimers intriguingly the authors did suggest that based on their systematic review there may be an association between exposure to the suns ultraviolet rays and protection against multiple sclerosis parkinsons disease and alzheimers but that this may be independent of vitamin d production the authors said that further studies would be needed to confirm these links and identify the mechanism responsible for such associations vitamin d and chronic pain over the years some scientists have theorized that low levels of vitamin d might cause or worsen chronic pain so in 2015 a group of scientists set out to collate existing evidence to examine the relationship could vitamin d ease chronic pain the resulting cochrane review updated in 2015 explains that '' observational and circumstantial evidence suggests that there may be a role for vitamin d deficiency in the etiology of chronic painful conditions '' the team scrutinized the findings from a number of studies following the analysis they concluded that the available scientific evidence is not strong enough to support a connection between vitamin d deficiency and chronic pain the authors write `` based on this evidence a large beneficial effect of vitamin d across different chronic painful conditions is unlikely whether vitamin d can have beneficial effects in specific chronic painful conditions needs further investigation '' so as ever more work will be needed to finally close the lid on this interaction we hope this article has enhanced your understanding of the latest scientific thinking around this fascinating chemical please remember however that overexposure to sunlight especially the hot midday sun can result in skin damage and increase risk of skin cancerit is still unclear what causes multiple sclerosis but new research closes in on the faulty immune system mechanisms involved in the development of this condition new research has identified another type of immune cell that may play a role in ms multiple sclerosis ms which is an autoimmune disease causes the immune system to mistakenly attack myelin myelin is the substance that coats axons which are the projections that allow neurons to connect and transmit information this process is known as demyelination and it affects the correct functioning of the central nervous system the condition is characterized by problems with balance and coordination as well as with eyesight to name but a few of its effects in the united states ms affects 250000–350000 people researchers still dont know for sure what causes ms but little by little they are uncovering the mechanisms at play and revealing more of the cellular culprits involved now neurologist roland martin and immunologist mireia sospedra at the university of zurich and university hospital zurich both in switzerland and colleagues have shown that a type of immune cell called b cells are key to the autoimmune reactions that characterize ms in a study whose results are now published in the journal cell the scientists explain that b cells influence the activity of another type of immune cell t cells which then cause inflammation '' we were able to show for the first time that certain b cells the cells of the immune system that produce antibodies activate the specific t cells that cause inflammation in the brain and nerve cell lesions '' roland martin b cells influence t cells studies into ms will tend to focus on the role played by t cells in the development of this condition since t cells are tasked with triggering an appropriate immune response once they detect the presence of pathogens when t cells malfunction and mistake healthy cells in the body for pathogens this causes harmful lesions and inflammation associated with autoimmune diseases such as ms ms new drug proven to slow brain shrinkage will this new drug vastly improve ms treatment read now martin and colleagues however found that the t cells may actually be mistakenly activated by other specialized immune cells the b cells this became apparent to the researchers after they observed the effects of certain drugs used to treat ms martin says `` a class of ms drugs called rituximab and ocrelizumab led us to believe that b cells also played an important part in the pathogenesis of the disease '' these drugs the authors note halt brain inflammation by removing b cells which suggests that these immune cells are ultimately responsible for the t cells activity a chain of reactions in order to better understand the role played by b cells in inflammation the researchers analyzed blood samples from people with ms through an experimental in vitro method they noticed that b cells were interacting with specialized t cells boosting their activity and influencing them to divide more thus feeding their attack cycle it became clear that b cells were the cause of t cell activity because when they eliminated the former the latter stopped proliferating '' this means that we can now explain the previously unclear mechanism of these ms drugs '' explains martin the investigators also note that the activated t cells they studied in the blood samples include the population of t cells that are active in brain inflammation related to ms martin and his team suggest that the t cells are able to read both the proteins released by b cells and recognize the nerve cells in the brain the scientists say that t cells are first activated in the peripheral blood only to migrate to the brain where they end up attacking myelin '' our findings not only explain how new ms drugs take effect but also pave the way for novel approaches in basic research and therapy for ms '' says martinthere are a million things that we do every day without thinking brushing our teeth drying our hair after a shower and unlocking our phone screen so we can check our messages are all part of our routine but what takes place in the brain as we learn a new habit what happens in the brain when habits take shape whats something youve learned to do without thinking it might be locking the door behind you as you leave which could lead to some panic later as you wonder if you actually remembered to do it it might be driving to work have you ever had that uncanny experience of finding yourself at your destination without fully remembering how you got there i certainly have and its all thanks to the brains trusty autopilot mode habits drive our lives so much so that sometimes we might want to break the habit as the saying goes and experience something new but habits are a useful tool when we do something enough times we become effortlessly good at it which is perhaps why aristotle reportedly believed that `` excellence is not an act but a habit '' so what does habit formation look like in the brain how do our neural networks behave as we learn something and consolidate it into an effortless behavior through repetition these are the questions that ann graybiel and her colleagues from the massachusetts institute of technology in chestnut hill set out to answer in a recent study the findings of which are published in the journal current biology bookending neural signals although a habitual action seems so simple and effortless it actually typically involves a string of small necessary movements such as unlocking the car getting into it adjusting the mirrors securing the seatbelt and so on this complex set of movements that amount to one routine action that we perform unconsciously is called `` chunking '' and although we know that it exists exactly how `` chunks '' form and stabilize has remained mysterious so far could this protein hold the key to memory to store or not to store learn about the protein that may hold the key to memory retention read now the new study now suggests that some brain cells are tasked with `` bookending '' the chunks that correspond to habitual actions in another study graybiel and her former team found that the striatum a region of the brain previously associated with decisionmaking also plays an important role in acquiring habits working with mice the team noted that the patterns of signals transmitted between neurons in the striatum shifted as the animals were taught a new sequence of actions turning in one direction at a sound signal while navigating a maze which then evolved into a habit at the beginning of the learning process the neurons in the mices striata emitted a continuous string of signals the scientists saw but as the mices actions started to consolidate into habitual movements the neurons fired their distinctive signals only at the beginning and at the end of the task performed when a signaling pattern takes root explain graybiel and colleagues a habit has taken shape and breaking it becomes a difficult endeavor brain patterns that indicate habits although edifying graybiels previous efforts did not establish for certain that the signaling patterns observed in the brain were related to habit formation they could simply have been motor commands that regulated the mices running behavior in order to confirm the idea that the patterns corresponded to the chunking associated with habit formation graybiel and her current team devised a different set of experiments in the new study they set out to teach rats to press two levers repeatedly in a specific order the researchers used reward conditioning to motivate the animals if they pressed the levers in the correct sequence they were offered chocolate milk to ensure that there would be no doubt regarding the solidity of the experiments results and that they would be able to identify brain activity patterns related to habit formation rather than anything else the scientists taught the rats different sequences sure enough once the animals had learned to press the levers in the sequence established by their trainers the team noticed the same `` bookending '' pattern in the striatum sets of neurons would fire signals at the beginning and end of a task thus delimitating a `` chunk '' `` i think '' explains graybiel `` this more or less proves that the development of bracketing patterns serves to package up a behavior that the brain and the animals consider valuable and worth keeping in their repertoire '' '' it really is a highlevel signal that helps to release that habit and we think the end signal says the routine has been done '' ann graybiel finally the team also noted the formation of another complementary pattern of activity in a group of inhibitory brain cells called `` interneurons '' in the striatum '' the interneurons '' explains lead study author nuné martiros of harvard university in cambridge ma `` were activated during the time when the rats were in the middle of performing the learned sequence '' she adds that the interneurons `` could possibly be preventing the principal neurons from initiating another routine until the current one was finished '' '' the discovery of this opposite activity by the interneurons '' martiros concludes `` also gets us one step closer to understanding how brain circuits can actually produce this pattern of activity ''eat well for a long and healthy life – thats a mantra that were all familiar with but what are the best foods to help us achieve that goal in this article we give you an overview of some of the most healthful and nutritious foods what are the best foods for a healthful diet we investigate official figures indicate that currently the top three countries in the world with the highest life expectancy are the principality of monaco japan and singapore these are places where the inhabitants experience a high quality of life and an important element of that is eating healthful meals often we find praise for `` superfoods '' in the media – foods so high in nutritional value that they are seen as dietary superheroes nutritionists reject the term `` superfoods '' as a buzzword that can influence people to place too high an expectation on a limited range of foods when in reality a balanced diet and healthful lifestyle require more effort than eating your fiveaday still there are certain foods that are more nutritious than others and many that as research has shown have a protective effect against a range of diseases here we give you an overview of some of the best foods that you may want to consider including in your diet in your quest for a happy healthy life edamame soybeans edamame or fresh soybeans have been a staple of asian cuisine for generations but they have also been gaining popularity on the western front of late soybeans are often sold in snack packs but they are also added to a varied range of dishes from soups to ricebased meals though they are served as cooked and seasoned on their own too edamame and tofu are rich in isoflavones which may have anticancer properties the beans are rich in isoflavones a type of phytoestrogen – that is plantderived estrogenlike substances isoflavones are known to have antiinflammatory antioxidant anticancer and antimicrobial properties thus they can help to regulate the inflammatory response of the body slow down cellular aging fight microbes as well as reportedly protect against certain types of cancer edamame are rich in two types of isoflavones in particular genistein and daidzein a study covered last year on medical news today found that genistein could be used to improve breast cancer treatment in the meantime the study authors note that `` lifetime intake of soy has been linked to reduced risk of breast cancer '' so we may want to include soybeans in our normal diet tofu soybean curd similarly tofu a white cheeselike product made of soybean curds has been linked to a wealth of health benefits for the same reasons tofu is often found cooked in typical eastern asian dishes it can be fried baked or boiled for instance in soups as a soy product it is rich in isoflavones whose health benefits weve outlined above it is also a good source of protein and it contains all the essential amino acids that our bodies need to synthesize protein moreover it is also rich in minerals which our bodies need to keep our teeth and bones strong and healthy and to derive energy tofu is a source of calcium iron manganese selenium phosphorous magnesium zinc and copper some specialists also suggest that eating tofu can make you feel fuller for longer so incorporating it into your meals may help to prevent overeating carrots this common culinary ingredient best known in its orange variety is famously recommended for its high content of betacarotene a pigment and carotenoid that gives the widespread version of this root vegetable its color carrots can protect against agerelated eyesight damage betacarotene can be converted by our bodies into vitamin a which according to the national institutes of health nih `` is involved in immune function vision reproduction and cellular communication '' our bodies can not produce vitamin a on their own so it must be derived from our diet this pigment is also an antioxidant that can protect the cells in our bodies from the aging damage caused by free radicals moreover research has shown that foods rich in carotenoids and of course carrots are a prime example here can protect against agerelated macular degeneration the vision damage caused by old age some varieties of carrots such as white carrots do not contain the orange pigment betacarotene but they do all contain falcarinol a nutrient which some studies claim may have a protective effect against cancer while raw carrots may be best for health as they retain their nutrients there are also ways of cooking carrots that can keep most of their nutrients `` locked in '' in an interview one researcher who investigated the anticancer effect of falcarinol from carrots kirsten brandt from newcastle university in the united kingdom suggests that we may want to boil our carrots whole if we want them cooked but still bursting with nutrients '' chopping up your carrots increases the surface area so more of the nutrients leach out into the water while they are cooked by keeping them whole and chopping them up afterwards you are locking in nutrients and the taste so the carrot is better for you all round '' cruciferous vegetables another important type of food on our list are cruciferous vegetables also known as `` brassica vegetables '' which include a wide array of green foods such as cabbage broccoli brussels sprouts cauliflower bok choy radish and kale cruciferous vegetables can bring a wealth of health benefits these vegetables boast an especially rich nutrient content including many vitamins c e k and folate minerals potassium calcium and selenium and carotenoids lutein betacarotene and zeaxanthin cruciferous vegetables also contain glucosinolates the substances that give these greens their characteristic pungent flavor these substances have been found to bring diverse health benefits some glucosinolates seem to regulate the bodys stress and inflammation response they have antimicrobial properties and some of them are being investigated for their anticancer potential one recent study covered on mnt found that leafy greens including some cruciferous vegetables such as kale and collard greens helped to slow down cognitive decline consequently the study researchers suggest that `` adding a daily serving of green leafy vegetables to your diet may be a simple way to foster your brain health '' kale broccoli and cabbage have also been shown to have a protective effect on heart health thanks to their vitamin k content finally cruciferous vegetables are also a great source of soluble fiber which plays a role in regulating blood sugar levels and diminishing the absorption of fat thus helping to prevent excess weight gain salmon recent studies have suggested that consumption of meat mostly red meat but also some kinds of poultry meat could be harmful to our health in the long run a good alternative for protein in this case is fish and salmon in particular affords many nutritional benefits salmon could protect cognitive health researchers say salmon is packed with protein and also contains plenty of omega3 fatty acids which is said to be beneficial for eyesight research has demonstrated that omega3 protects against dryeye syndrome characterized by insufficient lubrication of the eyes which can lead to soreness and blurred vision moreover omega3 fatty acids have been associated with brain health and research suggests that they can stave off cognitive decline associated with aging salmon also has a high potassium content and according to a new study reported on mnt last autumn potassium can prevent the onset of heart disease additionally this type of fish is rich in the mineral selenium which contributes to the health of the thyroid gland the thyroid gland helps to regulate hormonal activity and is involved in metabolic processes what are the best diets for 2018 learn which diets researchers recommend for a healthy life read now although both farmed and wild salmon are available on the market wild salmon has been found to be more nutritious overall with a higher protein content and also to have less saturated fat which means that it is more healthful and better for weight management however farmed salmon is a more sustainable resource and specialists say that the differences between farmed and wild caught salmon may not be so stark as to motivate us to prefer one type over the other citrus fruits finally citrus fruits are the unsung heroes of a healthful diet these include a number of fruits that are now available worldwide such as oranges grapefruit lemons limes clementines mandarins and tangerines the flavonoids in citrus fruits have been cited in connection to longer lifespans for a long time citrus fruits have been recommended by nutritionists and grandmothers alike for their high content of vitamin c which has antioxidant properties and is said to bring a wide array of health benefits including to reduce inflammatory damage and to fend off infections specialists point out however that this type of fruits goes well beyond just vitamin c when it comes to nutritional content '' the fruits are abundant in other macronutrients including sugars dietary fiber potassium folate calcium thiamin niacin vitamin b6 phosphorus magnesium copper riboflavin and pantothenic acid '' if this list of dietary goodies hasnt colored you impressed the specialists then go on to explain how citrus fruits contain even more organic compounds such as flavonoids coumarins and carotenoids that have been said to have protective effects against cancer cardiovascular diseases and neurodegenerative diseases research has shown that flavonoids in which citrus fruits are particularly rich can `` prevent or delay chronic diseases caused by obesity '' flavonoids have also garnered a lot of scientific attention for their anticancer potential and consumption of especially flavonoidrich citrus fruits has been associated with a significantly prolonged lifespan the inhabitants of the japanese prefecture of okinawa known to be some of the longestliving populations of the world regularly eat shikuwasa also known as `` shequasar '' a citrus fruit typical of the region which contains more flavonoids than most other citrus fruits drinking shikuwasa juice rich in flavonoid content has also been linked to better liver health although all of the foods mentioned above are appreciated for their significant health benefits we should not forget that wellbeing and longevity can not be achieved without a balanced inclusive diet and a healthful lifestyle moreover current studies suggest that our genetic makeup may have an important say as to which foods work best for our health so keeping our list of nutritious foods in mind make sure you follow the healthful diet that is most effective for youwhen it comes to new years resolutions eating better is at the top of our list but which diet plan is the best a panel of health experts on behalf of us news world report reveal the toprated diets for 2018 us news world report reveal the best diets for 2018 it is estimated that around 45 million people in the united states go on a diet each year with weight loss being the primary goal however whether youre dieting to lose weight or simply to improve overall health sticking to a specific eating plan can be challenging with so many diets to choose from how can you tell which one will work for you us news world report put together a panel of health experts every year to evaluate the most popular diets in the us this year the experts assessed 40 diets ranking them from lowest to highest in seven categories including the best diets for weight loss diabetes and heart health so we take a look at some of the key results the best diets for weight loss for the majority of dieters weight loss is the ultimate goal but losing weight and keeping it off is far from easy research suggests that approximately 30–35 percent of weight lost from dieting is regained within 1 year but it is possible to maintain weight loss its just a matter of finding the right eating plan the us news world report panel of experts evaluated 40 popular diets for their effects on both short and longterm weight loss noting that some people want to lose weight quickly while others want to maintain their weight loss for years to come the health experts rated weight watchers as the best diet on both accounts scoring 4 out of 5 for shortterm weight loss and 35 out of 5 for longterm weight loss a highfat diet without the weight gain study says its possible researchers say that there could be a way to avoid weight gain due to a highfat diet read now one of the longestrunning wellknown commercial diets weight watchers incorporates a points system wherein foods and beverages are assigned points based on their nutritional values and dieters are assigned a daily points allowance according to us news world report the expert panel `` appreciated the programs support system which helps dieters keep the pounds off '' the volumetrics diet came in at second place for best weight loss diet scoring 38 out of 5 for shortterm weight loss and 33 out of 5 for longterm weight loss designed by barbara rolls who is a professor of nutrition working at pennsylvania state university in centre county the volumetrics diet focuses on putting foods with lowenergy density such as lowfat milk grains and nonstarchy fruits and vegetables at the forefront of ones diet as well as limiting foods with highenergy density the best diets for heart health heart disease is the leading cause of death for men and women in the us killing around 610000 people in the country every year a poor diet can increase the risk of heart disease because eating food high in fat can lead to high blood pressure high cholesterol levels and obesity which are major risk factors for the condition but which eating plan is best for a healthy heart for this category the health experts analyzed each of the 40 diets and gave them average hearthealth ratings the dietary approaches to stop hypertension dash diet took first place in this category developed by the national heart lung and blood institute a part of the national institutes of health nih the dash diet is high in fruits vegetables whole grains fish poultry and lowfat dairy but it limits foods high in sugar and saturated and trans fats the dash diet was also ranked the best overall diet the mediterranean diet which emphasizes consuming fish and seafood at least twice weekly alongside regular consumption of fruits vegetables legumes and whole grains took joint second place for best hearthealthy diet alongside the ornish diet with the ornish diet fat is limited to 10 percent of daily calories and foods are divided into five groups from the least to most healthful the best diets for diabetes the mediterranean diet not only ranked highly for one of the best hearthealthy diets but it also took the crown for the best diabetes diet scoring 37 out of 5 it is estimated that around 303 million people in the us are living with diabetes wherein blood glucose levels become too high due to the bodys inability to produce or effectively use insulin although eating a healthful diet is important for all of us people with diabetes need to be extra cautious skipping meals or eating the wrong foods may lead to problematic highs and lows in blood glucose levels according to the panel `` the mediterranean diet is a great option for preventing or controlling diabetes some research has shown that diabetics on a mediterranean diet may improve their levels of hemoglobin a1c a measure of blood sugar over time '' the dash diet makes yet another appearance here ranking second in the best diabetes diet category with the experts noting that `` its menu looks a lot like widely accepted nutritional guidelines for those with the condition '' whichever eating plan that you decide is best for you its important to note that physical activity is just as important as the foods you eat current guidelines recommend that adults should engage in at least 150 minutes of moderateintensity or 75 minutes of vigorousintensity aerobic activity every weeka small pilot study of older people suggests that taking a daily supplement of a nutrient that is present naturally in foods may improve artery health and blood pressure a certain type of supplement may promote healthy arterial aging and reduced blood pressure the researchers at the university of colorado boulder found that the supplement called nicotinamide riboside mimics some of the effects of caloric restriction and activates several identical biological pathways studies of caloric restriction which have been done mainly in rodents and fruit flies and not so much in humans indicate that reducing daily calorie intake by a third may delay the aging process and lengthen lifespan the new study found that taking nicotinamide riboside supplements significantly improved blood pressure in people with mild hypertension or elevated blood pressure should the results be confirmed in a larger clinical trial the researchers think that they could have important implications in biomedicine such as increasing treatment options for elevated blood pressure elevated blood pressure and stage 1 high blood pressure are now defined as a blood pressure of 12080 or 13989 millimeters of mercury respectively which although is not high enough to justify medication is high enough to raise the risk for a heart attack or stroke currently the recommended options for people with elevated blood pressure include changes to diet and increasing physical activity senior study author doug seals who is a professor and researcher in the department of integrative physiology and his colleagues report their findings in a paper due to be published in the journal nature communications stiff arteries blood pressure and aging in a western culture stiffer arteries and the high blood pressure that results from them as we age is so common that it is accepted as a normal consequence of aging for example the american heart associations aha explanation of high blood pressure states `` the normal aging process can cause the big elastic arteries to become stiff over time '' in the united states an estimated 103 million adults have high blood pressure and this figure is expected to rise as the population continues to age however there is evidence that stiff arteries and high blood pressure are not necessarily a normal consequence of aging although genetics plays a role preserving artery health as we reach our 70s and beyond also depends on things that we can do something about such as lifestyle and diet nicotinamide riboside nicotinamide riboside is a trace nutrient present in certain foods such as cows milk and in higher concentrations in dietary supplement form studies have indicated that the nutrient contains `` unique properties as a vitamin b3 '' that include raising insulin sensitivity boosting the effects of exercise protecting the brain and resisting the harmful effects of a highfat diet high cholesterol in late life may mean better brain health learn how having a total cholesterol level higher in later life than it was in midlife is linked to a lower risk of marked cognitive decline read now for their study prof seals and his colleagues recruited 24 lean and healthy men and women from the boulder area their ages ranged from 55 to 79 and they were put into two groups one of the groups took 500 milligrams of nicotinamide riboside chloride twice per day for 6 weeks then spent another 6 weeks taking a placebo the other group followed the opposite pattern they took a placebo for 6 weeks and then a twicedaily 500milligram dose of nicotinamide riboside chloride for another 6 weeks the team analyzed blood samples that the subjects gave at the end of each treatment period and they took other `` physiological measurements '' at these times there were no serious side effects an evolutionary survival mechanism the results showed that taking 1000 milligrams of nicotinamide riboside each day increased levels of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide nad+ by 60 percent nad+ is a compound that activates sirtuins a group of enzymes thought to be responsible for the beneficial effects that calorie restriction has on healthy aging and longevity the compound levels of which tend to wane with age is involved in many of the bodys metabolic processes there is a theory which is supported by research that our bodies are programmed by evolution to conserve nad+ when food is scarce and that this is activated when we restrict calorie intake more recent research has also begun to investigate the possibility that older adults might regain this protective property and age more healthily by taking supplements of `` nad+ precursors '' such as nicotinamide riboside the results also found that nicotinamide riboside supplementation caused a drop in systolic blood pressure of 10 points in 13 of the participants who had elevated blood pressure or stage 1 high blood pressure this represents a 25 percent reduction in the risk of having a heart attack more work now needed to confirm findings the researchers conclude that their paper is a step forward in highlighting the potential benefits of nicotinamide riboside supplementation in older adults however they point out that there is still a lot of work to do to confirm that it is safe and effective they hope to investigate the specific impact of nicotinamide riboside on artery health and blood pressure more robustly in a larger clinical trial in the meantime another trial is about to investigate the effect of the supplement in older people with mild cognitive impairment a condition that often precedes alzheimers disease '' this was the first ever study to give this novel compound to humans over a period of time we found that it is welltolerated and appears to activate some of the same key biological pathways that calorie restriction does '' prof doug seals the study was partfunded by chromadex who make the supplements that the researchers usedapps are available for everything these days from shopping to entertainment and travel apps that claim to help look after your mental health and wellbeing are also available so we have selected the best apps for mental health mental health apps may help with conditions such as anxiety and depression as well as enhance psychological wellbeing approximately 483 million adults in the united states are faced with a mental health condition each year and 98 million of those are serious conditions that limit the activities of everyday life among us adults aged 18–44 mood disorders such as depression and bipolar disorder are now the third most common reason for hospitalizations furthermore those who live with severe mental illness are more likely to face chronic medical conditions and die around 25 years earlier exercising regularly and eating a healthful diet can boost mental health and wellbeing significantly help to reduce symptoms of depression anxiety and stress and increase endorphins responsible for happiness apps focus on protecting or improving mental health using methods including meditation hypnosis cognitive behavioral therapy cbt and providing a valuable support network medical news today have put together a list of the top 10 apps that can help to enhance your wellbeing and look after your mental health calm android free iphone free calm was branded as apples `` app of the year '' in 2017 the app is designed to reduce anxiety improve sleep and help you to feel happier calm focuses on the four key areas of meditation breathing sleep and relaxation with the aim of bringing joy clarity and peace to your daily life the app delivers meditations that can help you to destress as well as breathing programs music and sounds from nature to relax your mind and body and promote better sleep calm is the perfect app if you are new to meditation but it also offers programs for more advanced users meditation sessions are available in lengths of 3–25 minutes to fit in with your schedule headspace android free iphone free headspace uses mindfulness and meditation to help you perform at your best each day the apps mission is to provide you with the essential tools to achieve a happier healthier life whether you need to build healthier relationships find a place of calm keep your mind fit or reduce stress headspace has hundreds of themed mindfulness and meditation sessions to support you the app reports that meditation reduces daily stress and improves focus and attention what is more using headspace is suggested to enhance compassionate behavior toward others in just 3 weeks moodnotes iphone $ 399 moodnotes is a thought journal and mood diary the app can be used to capture your feelings and improve your thinking habits through the implementation of cbt and positive psychology track your mood and increase selfawareness of what influences it learn to recognize `` traps '' in your thinking and ways to rethink the situation if you happen to enter a `` thinking trap '' moodnotes will provide suggestions and useful perspectives to reduce stress and enhance wellbeing progress is viewable in the helpful `` insights '' dashboard googleadslotinfopush { '' slotname '' mnt_dlb1 '' slotcontainer '' mnt_dlb1_container } moodpath android free iphone free moodpath is your pocketsized mental health companion whether you are facing a rough patch or have concerns about your mental health the apps goal is to support you through the difficult times and guide you out the other side moodpath asks daily questions in order to assess your wellbeing and screen for symptoms of depression the screening progress aims to increase your awareness of your thoughts emotions and feelings after a period of 2 weeks the app generates an electronic document that you can discuss with a healthcare professional more than 150 videos and psychological exercises are available to help you understand your mood and strengthen your mental health pacifica android free iphone free pacifica is an app with anxiety and stress in mind it provides a toolbox to deal with daily anxiety and stress along with a highly supportive community of likeminded individuals pacifica helps you to break cycles of unhelpful thoughts feelings and behaviors through methods such as cbt mindfulness meditation mood tracking and relaxation the app houses audio lessons and activities that help you to cope with stress and depression and it sets daily challenges to help you tackle anxiety one day at a time and reach your longterm goals superbetter android free iphone free superbetter is a game focusing on increasing resilience and the ability to remain strong optimistic and motivated when presented with challenging obstacles in life a study by the university of pennsylvania in philadelphia found that when people played superbetter for 30 days their mood improved symptoms of anxiety and depression decreased and selfbelief to achieve goals increased the app will help you to adopt new habits improve your skills strengthen relationships complete meaningful projects and achieve lifelong dreams superbetter also has the potential to help you beat depression and anxiety cope with chronic illness and recover from posttraumatic stress disorder ptsd 7 cups android free iphone free if you are feeling lonely sad stressed or worried 7 cups could be the perfect app for you it provides online therapy and emotional support for anxiety and depression there are more than 160000 trained listeners and licensed therapists who are available to anonymously speak with 247 speak your mind and confide in listeners without the fear of being judged these listeners can be searched for based on their experience or their specialties such as bullying panic attacks eating disorders relationship breakups and many more affordable therapy with an online therapist can commence onetoone in a confidential setting anxiety relief hypnosis android free iphone free anxiety relief hypnosis is an app suggested to help improve relaxation and reduce anxiety within just 1–3 weeks of use the apps developers say that hypnosis can decrease anxious thoughts and enhance your response to relaxation which in turn resets your behavior and enables an improved response to stress the app provides an audio session read by a certified hypnotherapist together with calming music and sounds from nature to aid relaxation the `` awaken at end '' feature can be disabled to allow you to fall into restful sleep at bedtime happify android free iphone free happify is a space to overcome negative thoughts and stress and build resilience whether you are feeling stressed anxious or sad happify helps you to regain control of your thoughts and feelings in fact 86 percent of the apps users report feeling better about their lives after 2 months of using it happify employs techniques and evidencebased interventions in the areas of cbt positive psychology and mindfulness to help you break old and unhealthful patterns and form new healthful habits the app offers activities and games to improve your life satisfaction and ability to fight negativity your emotional wellbeing is calculated as a happiness score that you can improve upon each week talkspace android free iphone free talkspace is a counseling and therapy app that connects users with a convenient affordable and confidential way to deal with anxiety stress depression relationship issues and chronic illness a free consultation is provided with a matching agent to identify the ideal therapist for your needs based on several factors more than 1000 licensed therapists are available who specialize in anxiety phobia depression domestic violence ptsd and more after upgrading and becoming a member access is given to a secure chat room wherein you can raise and discuss your worries with your private counselor the apps pricing plans are described as being approximately 80 percent lower than traditional officebased appointments how to be happy in 2018 find out how to maintain your happiness this year read nowcancer is the leading cause of death across the globe for years now researchers have led meticulous studies focused on how to stop this deadly disease in its tracks how close are we to finding more effective treatments how far has cancer research come the world health organization who note that worldwide nearly 1 in 6 deaths are down to cancer in the united states alone the national cancer institute nci estimated 1688780 new cancer cases and 600920 cancerrelated deaths in 2017 currently the most common types of cancer treatment are chemotherapy radiotherapy tumor surgery and in the case prostate cancer and breast cancer hormonal therapy however other types of treatment are beginning to pick up steam therapies that on their own or in combination with other treatments are meant to help defeat cancer more efficiently and ideally have fewer side effects innovations in cancer treatment aim to address a set of issues that will typically face healthcare providers and patients including aggressive treatment accompanied by unwanted side effects tumor recurrence after treatment surgery or both and aggressive cancers that are resilient to widely utilized treatments below we review some of the most recent cancer research breakthroughs that give us renewed hope that better therapies and prevention strategies will soon follow suit boosting the immune systems arsenal one type of therapy that has attracted a lot of attention recently is immunotherapy which aims to reinforce our own bodies existing arsenal against foreign bodies and harmful cells our immune systems response to the spread of cancer tumors but many types of cancer cell are so dangerous because they have ways of `` duping '' the immune system either into ignoring them altogether or else into giving them a `` helping hand '' lung cancer tumor growth halved with new approach to stop cancer from spreading we may have to look at mysterious noncoding molecules a recent study suggests read now therefore some types of aggressive cancer are able to spread more easily and become resistant to chemotherapy or radiotherapy however thanks to in vitro and in vivo experiments researchers are now learning how they might be able to `` deactivate '' the cancer cells protective systems a study published last year in nature immunology found that macrophages or white blood cells that are normally tasked with `` eating up '' cellular debris and other harmful foreign `` objects '' failed to obliterate the superaggressive cancer cells that was because in their interaction with the cancer cells the macrophages read not one but two signals meant to repel their `` cleansing '' action this knowledge however also showed the scientists the way forward by blocking the two relevant signaling pathways they reenabled the white blood cells to do their work therapeutic viruses and innovative vaccines a surprising weapon in the fight against cancer could be therapeutic viruses as revealed by a team from the united kingdom earlier this year in their experiments they managed to use a reovirus to attack brain cancer cells while leaving healthy cells alone '' this is the first time it has been shown that a therapeutic virus is able to pass through the brainblood barrier '' explained the study authors which `` opens up the possibility that this type of immunotherapy could be used to treat more people with aggressive brain cancers '' another area for improvement in immunotherapy is `` dendritic vaccines '' a strategy wherein dendritic cells which play a key role in the bodys immune response are collected from a persons body `` armed '' with tumorspecific antigens which will teach them to `` hunt '' and destroy relevant cancer cells and injected back into the body to boost the immune system in a new study researchers in switzerland identified a way to improve the action of these dendritic vaccines by creating artificial receptors able to recognize and `` abduct '' tiny vesicles that have been linked to cancer tumors spread in the body by attaching these artificial receptors to the dendritic cells in the `` vaccines '' the therapeutic cells are enabled to recognize harmful cancer cells with more accuracy importantly recent studies have shown that immunotherapy may work best if delivered in tandem with chemotherapy specifically if the chemotherapy drugs are delivered first and they are followed up with immunotherapy but this approach does have some pitfalls it is difficult to control the effects of this combined method so sometimes healthy tissue may be attacked alongside cancer tumors however scientists from two institutions in north carolina have developed a substance that once injected into the body becomes gellike a `` bioresponsive scaffold system '' the scaffold can hold both chemotherapy and immunotherapy drugs at once releasing them systematically into primary tumors this method allows for a better control of both therapies ensuring that the drugs act on the targeted tumor alone the nanoparticle revolution speaking of specially developed tools for delivering drugs straight to the tumor and hunting down micro tumors with accuracy and efficiency the past couple of years have seen a `` boom '' in nanotechnology and nanoparticle developments for cancer treatments nanoparticles could be a gamechanger in cancer treatment nanoparticles are microscopic particles that have garnered so much attention in clinical research among other fields because they bring us the chance to develop precise less invasive methods of tackling disease vitally they can target cancer cells or cancer tumors without harming healthy cells in the surrounding environment some nanoparticles have now been created to provide very focused hyperthermic treatment which is a type of therapy that uses hot temperatures to make cancer tumors shrink last year scientists from china and the uk managed to come up with a type of `` selfregulating '' nanoparticle that was able to expose tumors to heat while avoiding contact with healthy tissue '' this could potentially be a gamechanger in the way we treat people who have cancer '' said one of the researchers in charge of this project these tiny vehicles can also be used to target cancer stemlike cells which are undifferentiated cells that have been linked to the resilience of certain types of cancer in the face of traditional treatments such as chemotherapy thus nanoparticles can be `` loaded '' with drugs and set to `` hunt down '' cancer stem cells to prevent the growth or recurrence of tumors scientists have experimented with drugfilled nanoparticles in the treatment of various types of cancer including breast cancer and endometrial cancer no less importantly minuscule vehicles called `` nanoprobes '' can be used to detect the presence of micrometastases which are secondary tumors so tiny that they can not be seen using traditional methods dr steven k libutti director of the rutgers cancer institute of new jersey in new brunswick calls micrometastases `` the achilles heel of surgical management for cancer '' and argues that nanoprobes `` go a long way to solving such problems '' tumor starvation strategies another type of strategy that researchers have been investigating of late is that of `` starving '' tumors of the nutrients they need to grow and spread this scientists point out could be a saving grace in the case of aggressive resilient cancers that can not effectively be eradicated otherwise one novel method of attacking cancer is by starving cancer cells to death three different studies whose results were all published in january this year looked at ways of cutting off cancers nutritional supplies one of these studies looked at ways of stopping glutamine a naturally occurring amino acid from feeding cancer cells certain cancers such as breast lung and colon are known to use this amino acid to support their growth by blocking cancer cells access to glutamine the researchers managed to maximize the impact of oxidative stress a process that eventually induces cell death on these cells some aggressive types of breast cancer may be halted by stopping the cells from `` feeding '' on a particular enzyme that helps them to produce the energy they need to thrive another way of depleting cancer cells of energy is by blocking their access to vitamin b2 as researchers from the university of salford in the uk have observed as one study author says `` this is hopefully the beginning of an alternative approach to halting cancer stem cells '' this strategy could help individuals receiving cancer treatment to avoid the toxic side effects of chemotherapy cancer treatments and epigenetics epigenetics refers to the changes caused in our bodies by alterations in gene expression which dictate whether certain characteristics appear or if certain `` actions '' are affected at a biological level according to research that addressed the impact of such changes many cancers as well as the behaviors of cancer cells are determined by epigenetic factors '' recent advances in the field of epigenetics have shown that human cancer cells harbor global epigenetic abnormalities in addition to numerous genetic alterations '' '' these genetic and epigenetic alterations interact at all stages of cancer development working together to promote cancer progression '' thus it is crucial for specialists to understand when and where to intervene and the expression of which genes they may need to switch on or off depending on their role in the development of cancer one study for instance found that the gene responsible for the advent of huntingtons disease produces a set of molecules whose action may actually prevent cancer from occurring now the researchers challenge is to channel the therapeutic potential of this process without triggering huntingtons disease however the scientists are hopeful '' we believe a shortterm treatment cancer therapy for a few weeks might be possible '' says the studys senior author another recent study was able to establish that estrogenreceptor positive breast cancers that become resistant to chemotherapy gain their resilience through genetic mutations that `` confer a metastatic advantage to the tumor '' but this knowledge also gave researchers the `` break '' that they needed to come up with an improved treatment for such stubborn tumors a combination therapy that delivers the chemotherapeutic drug fulvestrant alongside an experimental enzyme inhibitor what does this all mean cancer research is running at full speed taking advantage of all the technological advances that science has achieved over recent years but what does that mean in terms of coming up with a cure for cancer whether or not there will ever be a cure for all cancer types is currently a matter of strong debate although promising studies are published and covered by the media almost every day cancer types vary immensely this makes it very difficult to say that an approach that works for one type will be adaptable to all also while there is much emerging research promising more effective treatments most of these projects are still in their early stages having conducted in vitro and in vivo experiments some potential treatments still have a long way to go before clinical trials in human patients still that doesnt mean we should lose all hope some researchers explain that these efforts should make us optimistic while we may not be at the stage where we can claim that cancer can easily be eradicated our furthered knowledge and ever more precise tools keep us ahead of the game and improve our odds in the fight against this diseasenew research published in the journal aging finds a compound that stops cancer cells from spreading by starving them of vitamin b2 the findings may revolutionize traditional chemotherapy current chemotherapy has a wide range of serious side effects but that may be about to change suggests new research a team of britishbased researchers set out to find a nontoxic therapeutic agent that targets the mitochondria of cancer cells mitochondria are energyproducing organelles found inside each cell the compound recently found by the scientists can stop cancer stemlike cells from proliferating by interfering with their energycreating process inside the mitochondria the team was led by prof michael lisanti the chair of translational medicine at the university of salford in the united kingdom and the new study can be accessed here starving cancer cells of energy prof lisanti and his colleagues used drugscreening to identify the compound which is called diphenyleneiodonium chloride dpi as the researchers explain various cell assays and other cell culture experiments revealed that dpi reduced over 90 percent of the energy produced in the cells mitochondria dpi achieved this by blocking vitamin b2 also known as riboflavin which depleted the cells of energy '' our observation is that dpi is selectively attacking the cancer stem cells by effectively creating a vitamin deficiency in other words by turning off energy production in cancer stem cells we are creating a process of hibernation '' prof michael lisanti the cancer stem cells are the ones that produce the tumor `` its extraordinary '' continues prof lisanti `` the cells just sit there as if in a state of suspended animation '' importantly dpi proved to be nontoxic for socalled `` bulk '' cancer cells which are largely thought to be nontumorigenic is chemo at the heart of cancer regrowth paradoxically the very treatment that is supposed to stop cancer from spreading sometimes enables it to do so read now this suggests that the compound might be successful where current chemotherapy fails the team explains `` dpi treatment can be used to acutely confer a mitochondrialdeficient phenotype which we show effectively depletes cancer stemlike cells from the heterogeneous cancer cell population '' '' these findings have significant therapeutic implications for potently targeting cancer stemlike cells while minimizing toxic side effects '' they add a new era of chemotherapy '' we believe '' say the scientists `` that dpi is one of the most potent and highly selective cancer stemlike cells inhibitors discovered to date '' the findings are particularly significant given the dire need for nontoxic cancer therapies and the serious side effects of conventional chemotherapy '' the beauty of dpi is that it makes the cancer stem cells metabolically inflexible so that they will be highly susceptible to many other drugs '' explains prof lisanti study coauthor prof federica sotgia also comments on the significance of the recent findings saying `` in terms of chemotherapies for cancer we clearly need something better than what we have at present and this is hopefully the beginning of an alternative approach to halting cancer stem cells '' in fact the authors specialize in finding alternative nontoxic therapies and they hope that their most recent findings will mark the beginning of a new era of chemotherapy perhaps one that uses nontoxic molecules to target the mitochondrial activity of cancer stemlike cells the researchers propose to call these new molecules `` mitoflavoscins ''periods usually arrive once each month but the exact date flow cramp severity and accompanying symptoms are not quite that consistent for this very reason the app market is flooded with period trackers that aim to offer insight into your monthly cycle period tracking apps can help you to learn more about your cycle and plan for future periods bleeding occurs every 28 days for the majority of women but it is common for the menstrual cycle to be either shorter or longer in duration and for bleeding to start anywhere from day 21 to day 40 period length may also vary and last for 3–8 days with an average of 5 days bleeding is often heaviest on days 1 and 2 and starts to become lighter thereafter tracking your period can be useful for several reasons period tracking can help you to get to know your own body and cycle and observe any symptoms such as mood swings or headaches that may occur during a particular phase of your cycle period tracking can help to identify any changes to your menstrual cycle that may be an indicator of potential health issues furthermore using period tracking apps can tell you when you are likely to be most fertile if you are avoiding pregnancy or trying to become pregnant there are hundreds of apps that track and analyze the menstrual cycle so how do you know which one is the best fit for you medical news today have tried and tested apps galore to bring you a selection of the top 10 apps to start tracking your period today period calendar android free iphone free period calendar can help to track and predict your period plus provide information on your fertile window and potential ovulation date in addition to the basic menstrual cycle tracking function the app can be used to record temperature intercourse birth control weight cervical mucus mood and any other symptoms the pill reminder ensures that you will never forget a dose ever again whether you need to remember to take medications supplements birth control pills or even an injection the pill tracker can be set up to remind you flo period tracker android free iphone free if you are wondering when you last had a period or would like to know when your next one is due you can easily find out using flo flo uses machine learning to accurately and reliably predict menstruation and ovulation using the apps bold and simple calendar you will be able to log how you are feeling your symptoms sex drive and menstruation flow the app can also be used to track sleep water consumption and physical activity the insights dashboard helps you to learn more about your body and cycle and it also provides personalized health insights each day clue android free iphone free clue has been ranked as the top period and ovulation tracking app by the obstetrics gynecology journal which is a publication of the american college of obstetricians and gynecologists clue uses science to help its users to identify unique patterns in their menstrual cycle with the apps period tracker multiple mood trackers health logs and exercise trackers your health and menstrual cycle will no longer be a mystery the developers promise to be inclusive of all ages and never use butterflies flowers euphemisms or pink the apps unique algorithm learns from the data that you add which means that the more you use clue the smarter it will become my calendar android free iphone free my calendar is a sophisticated elegant and very customizable period tracker it can help those with irregular cycles as well as people who have worries about conceiving birth control and contraception with my calendar you can track regular and irregular periods temperature weight moods symptoms and blood flow with its discreet reminders you can be prepared for approaching periods along with ovulation and fertile days you can access all your essential information using the health tracker at a glance and the calendar can be passwordprotected to ensure that your information remains private glow android free iphone free glow can track your period and record your symptoms mood sexual activity and medications glows datadriven menstrual and ovulation calculator helps women to take control of their reproductive health the app can forecast periods and ovulation and its predictions become smarter over time not only can the app help women who are avoiding or attempting pregnancy but it also helps those who are undergoing fertility treatments such as intrauterine insemination and in vitro fertilization you can make charts of your menstrual and fertility data set medication birth control and ovulation reminders as well as log more than 40 different health signals glow also offers a subscription to unlock comparative insights premium articles private messaging and premium support eve android free iphone free eve is a savvy period tracker that predicts upcoming periods and your chances of pregnancy discover trends in your cycle by logging your moods and symptoms and view your health data in eyecatching charts with eve you can review past periods forecast future periods and ovulation and visualize your cycle history in a new way with eves interactive staircase the app provides access to a community where you can discuss periods sex and health if you are concerned about anything at all ask the community no subject is off limits and you can learn from those who have had similar experiences period tracker lite android free iphone free the period tracker lite app makes logging menstrual cycles quick and easy press a button at the start of each period and period tracker lite will record your data and use the average of 3 months worth of data to calculate your next period take notes each day about your symptoms such as flow cramps bloating backache headache and tender breasts your weight temperature and a choice of more than 30 moods can also be selected period dates fertility days and ovulation are all shown in a simple monthview calendar the app provides comprehensive charts that illustrate weight changes temperature period length cycle length and symptoms period plus iphone free period plus can help you to keep in touch with the duration of your menstrual cycles and tells you when the next one will begin the app sends you reminders of your next period and fertile window helping you to get to know your cycle and plan ahead with birth control pregnancy planning and even vacations period plus tracks period duration and intensity cramp intensity breast tenderness breakouts migraines basal body temperature cervical mucus sexual activity exercise pregnancy test results sleep patterns and more my cycles android free iphone free regardless of whether you are trying to conceive or become an expert on when your next period is due my cycles can help my cycles tracks periods in a handy calendar and predicts future ones wherever you are you can track your period symptoms mood and medications with my cycles in an instant record your periods view them at a glance with the easytoread calendar and plan periods fertile days and ovulation for the next 12 months if you are trying to get pregnant the app lets you know when your chances of conceiving are higher with helpful reminders likewise it tells you when to use extra protection if you are not trying to conceive cycles iphone free the cycles app is a simple period and fertility tracker that requires little input irrespective of having regular or irregular periods with cycles all you need to do is turn the dial on the first day of your period and thats it the app automatically adjusts your cycle length cycles is designed so that you can invite your partner to the app to keep up with your cycle this feature is useful so that your partner can provide emotional support plan trips and romantic evenings and know when your most fertile days are if you are trying to conceive the app uses scientifically backed fertility tracking that predicts fertility with an accuracy of up to 95 percent optional password protection keeps your information secure from prying eyes seven tips for relieving period bloating here are some tips about how to relieve periodrelating bloating read nowwant to get fit this year but dont know where to start we have chosen the best fitness blogs to empower you and help to get you started on your journey to tiptop physical fitness fitness blogs aim to inspire empower and motivate you to reach your health and fitness goals getting up off the couch and taking part in regular physical activity is one of the most important things you can do to ensure you remain healthy regular exercise can help to control your weight strengthen your bones and muscles and reduce your risk of cardiovascular disease type 2 diabetes and some cancers furthermore being active improves your mood mental health mobility and ability to complete tasks as an older adult as well as increases your chances of living longer adults are recommended to do at least 150 minutes of moderateintensity physical activity each week to achieve substantial health benefits and increase to 300 minutes for more extensive benefits if you are stuck on where to begin or are worried about getting injured the good news is that aerobic activity such as brisk walking is considered to be safe for most people hundreds of fitness blogs are also available to help you on your way and provide tips ideas and information on the best types of activity to boost fitness and instructions on how to do them medical news today have trawled through the many fitness blogs out there to bring you the top 10 fitness blogs for 2018 myfitnesspal blog myfitnesspal is a smartphone app and website that records physical activity and diet the app works out the optimal intake of calories and nutrients for the user to accomplish their goals and it uses elements of gaming to motivate them myfitnesspals blog focuses on providing easytoread information on eating psychology nutrition weight loss fitness inspiration workout guides and motivational support through the victory stories on the blog fitness posts include seven tips to lift weights without causing injury songs that should feature on your 2018 running playlist and brain and bodyboosting moves that you should add to your next walk visit the myfitnesspal blog natalie jill fitness natalie jill fitness was founded after natalie jill gained weight straight after losing her house retiring and ending her marriage she turned her life around and in the process became an inspiration to others natalie specializes in fitness weight loss healthy lifestyles and body weight training natalie coaches motivates and empowers people to stop making excuses and instead make solutions to become the best version of themselves recent posts on her blog include a bootybuilding workout to activate your glutes an upper body workout using just your body weight and how to do a chin up visit the natalie jill fitness blog ace ace is an acronym for the american council on exercise ace are a nonprofit organization that certifiy exercise professionals and health coaches aces vision is to get people moving and provide scientifically backed education to fitness professionals and health enthusiasts to make an impact on preventable diseases related to inactivity by 2035 their expert articles cover fitness topics such as exercises to improve agility lower body exercises to complete instead of doing squats and the many types of strength and their benefits visit the ace blog born fitness adam bornstein developed born fitness with the aim of taking the stress out of health nutrition and fitness whether you hope to lose weight gain muscle eat more healthfully or live longer born fitness provide solutions to fit your needs the born fitness team will help you to identify the diets strategies exercises and workouts that are best suited to you so that you can apply them to your life achieve your goals and live stronger and longer activities are available on the blog to suit all levels of fitness from beginner to advanced training posts include how to incorporate resistance bands into your routine preventing knee back and shoulder injuries during your workouts and the truth about the 7minute workout visit the born fitness blog the fitnessista the fitnessista is a healthy lifestyle blog written by gina harney who is a fitness instructor personal trainer and weight loss specialist based in san diego ca gina is a mom of two and she shares snippets of her family life on the blog along with quick effective workouts and healthful recipes that are super speedy to put together the latest posts on the fitnessista include things to help with fitness motivation the barre hiit workout that you can practice anywhere and a strength and cardio workout that can be completed on a park bench visit the fitnessista blog suzanne bowen fitness suzanne bowen compiled all of the training that she had received and given over the course of 16 years and created suzanne bowen fitness suzanne is also the creator of barreamped which is an internationally taught barre fitness technique regardless of whether you havent exercised for a while or if you are a seasoned expert suzanne has workouts that range from 10 minutes to over an hour that are effective for everyone the blog provides challenges and workouts to boost your fitness levels such as the crunchless abs workout a light weight routine for the upper body and a rebounding workout and its benefits visit the suzanne bowen fitness blog knockedup fitness erica ziel is a mother of three and the founder of knockedup fitness erica is a personal trainer and expert for fitnessinfused pilates with more than 10 years experience training numerous clients erica is an expert in prenatal and postnatal training and teaching women how to strengthen their core muscles for an easier pregnancy delivery and recovery the knockedup fitness blog delivers real and relevant topics to the busy mom or momtobe with articles such as why its important to properly strengthen your core how to prevent and relieve back pain during pregnancy and how movement can prepare your body for birth visit the knockedup fitness blog lisa gulley established workout mommy in 2007 to provide health and fitness information for moms lisa says that as a mom of four boys she is fully aware of how being a mom requires you to look after someone other than yourself 247 and that finding the time to exercise is a challenge lisa aims to provide the inspiration motivation and ideas you need to fit fitness exercise and health into your busy schedule and keep your sanity in check posts on workout mommy include ways to overcome a negative mindset tips on how to start a fitness routine and the types of cardio exercises that are best for women visit the workout mommy blog love sweat fitness katie dunlop is a certified personal trainer group fitness instructor and the creator of love sweat fitness she started love sweat fitness with the aim of inspiring women all over the world to find their happy and healthy body after college katie found herself overweight by 45 pounds and was fed up with trendy workouts and fad diets she decided to take her fitness and health into her own hands lost her excess weight and identified her true passion for helping women to reach their goals inspiring posts on katies blog include ways to make your morning workout the best part of your day five tips for a happier and healthier you this year and how to train for a 10k run visit the love sweat fitness blog nerd fitness nerd fitness say that they are a community of misfits mutants and underdogs that are ready to help you on your fitness journey whether you are overweight and frustrated in danger of serious health issues want to become a healthier parent or just want to look after or feel better about yourself nerd fitness aim to help you to make small changes so that you can live a happier healthier and more fulfilling life blog posts include the main differences between weight loss success and failure the number of calories you burn while walking and how to get strong like logan with the wolverine workout visit the nerd fitness blog the 10 best fitness apps pair these blogs with the apps listed here to boost your chances of becoming fit and healthy read nowa new study may have revealed a possible new prevention and treatment strategy for osteoarthritis which is one of the most common and debilitating agerelated diseases in the united states researchers suggest that increasing levels of foxo proteins could be one way to prevent and treat osteoarthritis researchers at the scripps research institute tsri in san diego ca reveal that proteins called foxo are key for joint health by boosting the levels of these foxo proteins they believe that it might be possible to treat osteoarthritis or even stop the disease from developing senior study author dr martin lotz from the department of molecular medicine at tsri and his team recently reported their results in the journal science translational medicine osteoarthritis also referred to as degenerative joint disease is estimated to affect more than 30 million adults in the united states making it the most common type of arthritis the condition is characterized by a breakdown of cartilage which is the tissue that cushions the joints of the bones osteoarthritis most commonly affects the knee hip and hand joints in a previous study dr lotz and team found that foxo levels in joint cartilage are reduced for this latest study the researchers sought to find out more about how foxo proteins affect joint health the effects of foxo deficiency in mice the researchers reached their findings by studying mice that were lacking foxo proteins in their joint cartilage compared with control mice the scientists found that foxodeficient mice experienced degeneration of the joints at a significantly younger age what is more the rodents with foxo deficiency showed greater susceptibility to cartilage damage during a treadmill test and they were also more likely to develop posttraumatic osteoarthritis due to knee injury osteoarthritis could this algae extract lead to a cure researchers reveal how an algae extract may offer a cure for osteoarthritis read now upon further investigation the scientists found that the foxodeficient mice showed abnormalities in a process called autophagy which is a natural process by which cells get rid of any unwanted or damaged components in order to maintain their health and carry out any repairs foxo deficiency also led to abnormalities in the processes that protect our cells against damage caused by free radicals additionally the study revealed that mice lacking foxo proteins failed to produce the required levels of a protein called lubricin which helps to protect joint cartilage against wear and tear the reduced production of lubricin was linked to a reduction in healthy cells in the `` superficial zone '' which is a layer of cartilage in the knee joint boosting foxo may prevent osteoarthritis so why does foxo cause these issues the researchers found that foxo proteins regulate the expression of genes that are important for joint health including those that control inflammation and autophagy the absence of foxo proteins in the joint cartilage leads to an increase in inflammation and a decrease in autophagy meaning that cells are unable to repair any damage '' the housekeeping mechanisms which keep cells healthy were not working in these knockout mice '' says dr lotz for the final part of their study the scientists wanted to see whether boosting foxo levels could restore these `` housekeeping mechanisms '' by increasing foxo expression in cells taken from people with osteoarthritis the researchers were able to normalize the expression of genes associated with inflammation and autophagy and the production of lubricin was also restored the team now plans to create molecules that can increase foxo levels and assess their effects in experimental osteoarthritis models '' drugs that boost the expression and activity of foxo could be a strategy for preventing and treating osteoarthritis '' dr martin lotzaccording to the national institutes of health people have used marijuana or cannabis to treat their ailments for at least 3000 years however the food and drug administration have not deemed marijuana safe or effective in the treatment of any medical condition although cannabidiol a substance that is present in marijuana received approval in june 2018 as a treatment for some types of epilepsy marijuana is being increasingly legalized in the us but is it safe this tension between a widespread belief that marijuana is an effective treatment for a wide assortment of ailments and a lack of scientific knowledge on its effects has been somewhat exacerbated in recent times by a drive toward legalization twentynine states plus the district of columbia have now made marijuana available for medical and in some states recreational purposes a recent study published in the journal addiction also found that use of marijuana is increasing sharply across the united states although this rise may not be linked to the legalization of marijuana in participating states nevertheless this rise in use is prompting major public health concerns in this article we look at the scientific evidence weighing the medical benefits of marijuana against its associated health risks in an attempt to answer this simple question is marijuana good or bad what are the medical benefits of marijuana over the years research has yielded results to suggest that marijuana may be of benefit in the treatment of some conditions these are listed below chronic pain last year a large review from the national academies of sciences engineering and medicine assessed more than 10000 scientific studies on the medical benefits and adverse effects of marijuana one area that the report looked closely at was the use of medical marijuana to treat chronic pain chronic pain is a leading cause of disability affecting more than 25 million adults in the us the review found that marijuana or products containing cannabinoids which are the active ingredients in marijuana or other compounds that act on the same receptors in the brain as marijuana are effective at relieving chronic pain alcoholism and drug addiction another comprehensive review of evidence published last year in the journal clinical psychology review revealed that using marijuana may help people with alcohol or opioid dependencies to fight their addictions but this finding may be contentious the national academies of sciences review suggests that marijuana use actually drives increased risk for abusing and becoming dependent on other substances also the more that someone uses marijuana the more likely they are to develop a problem with using marijuana individuals who began using the drug at a young age are also known to be at increased risk of developing a problem with marijuana use depression posttraumatic stress disorder and social anxiety the review published in clinical psychology review assessed all published scientific literature that investigated the use of marijuana to treat symptoms of mental illness evidence to date suggests that marijuana could help to treat some mental health conditions its authors found some evidence supporting the use of marijuana to relieve depression and posttraumatic stress disorder symptoms that being said they caution that marijuana is not an appropriate treatment for some other mental health conditions such as bipolar disorder and psychosis the review indicates that there is some evidence to suggest that marijuana might alleviate symptoms of social anxiety but again this is contradicted by the national academies of sciences engineering and medicine review which instead found that regular users of marijuana may actually be at increased risk of social anxiety cancer evidence suggests that oral cannabinoids are effective against nausea and vomiting caused by chemotherapy and some small studies have found that smoked marijuana may also help to alleviate these symptoms alcohol more damaging to brain health than marijuana a recent study suggests that alcohol may cause more harm to the brain than marijuana read now some studies on cancer cells suggest that cannabinoids may either slow down the growth of or kill some types of cancer however early studies that tested this hypothesis in humans revealed that although cannabinoids are a safe treatment they are not effective at controlling or curing cancer multiple sclerosis the shortterm use of oral cannabinoids may improve symptoms of spasticity among people with multiple sclerosis but the positive effects have been found to be modest epilepsy in june 2018 the food and drug administration fda approved the use of a medication containing cannabidiol cbd to treat two rare severe and specific types of epilepsy called lennoxgastaut syndrome and dravet syndrome that are difficult to control with other types of medication this cbdbased drug is known as epidiolex cbd is one of many substances that occurs in cannabis it is not psychoactive the drug for treating these conditions involves a purified form of cbd the approval was based on the findings of research and clinical trials a study published in 2017 found that the use of cbd resulted in far fewer seizures among children with dravet syndrome compared with a placebo dravet syndrome seizures are prolonged repetitive and potentially lethal in fact 1 in 5 children with dravet syndrome do not reach the age of 20 years in the study 120 children and teenagers with dravet syndrome all of whom were aged between 2 and 18 were randomly assigned to receive an oral cbd solution or a placebo for 14 weeks along with their usual medication the researchers found that the children who received the cbd solution went from having around 12 seizures per month to an average of six seizures per month three children receiving cbd did not experience any seizures at all children who received the placebo also saw a reduction in seizures but this was slight their average number of seizures went down from 15 each month before the study to 14 seizures per month during the study the researchers say that this 39 percent reduction in seizure occurrence provides strong evidence that the compound can help people living with dravet syndrome and that their paper has the first rigorous scientific data to demonstrate this however the study also found a high rate of side effects linked to cbd more than 9 in 10 of the children treated with cbd experienced side effects most commonly vomiting fatigue and fever the patient information leaflet for epidiolex warns of side effects such as liver damage sedation and thoughts of suicide what are the health risks of marijuana at the other end of the spectrum is the plethora of studies that have found negative associations between marijuana use and health they are listed below mental health problems daily marijuana use is believed to exacerbate existing symptoms of bipolar disorder among people who have this mental health problem however the national academies of sciences engineering and medicine report suggests that among people with no history of the condition there is only limited evidence of a link between marijuana use and developing bipolar disorder moderate evidence suggests that regular marijuana users are more likely to experience suicidal thoughts and there is a small increased risk of depression among marijuana users marijuana use is likely to increase risk of psychosis including schizophrenia but a curious finding among people with schizophrenia and other psychoses is that a history of marijuana use is linked with improved performance on tests assessing learning and memory testicular cancer although there is no evidence to suggest any link between using marijuana and an increased risk for most cancers the national academies of sciences did find some evidence to suggest an increased risk for the slowgrowing seminoma subtype of testicular cancer respiratory disease regular marijuana smoking is linked to increased risk of chronic cough but `` it is unclear '' whether smoking marijuana worsens lung function or increases the risk of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or asthma a 2014 study that explored the relationship between marijuana use and lung disease suggested that it was plausible that smoking marijuana could contribute to lung cancer though it has been difficult to conclusively link the two the authors of that study published in the journal current opinion in pulmonary medicine conclude '' there is unequivocal evidence that habitual or regular marijuana smoking is not harmless a caution against regular heavy marijuana usage is prudent '' '' the medicinal use of marijuana is likely not harmful to lungs in low cumulative doses '' they add `` but the dose limit needs to be defined recreational use is not the same as medicinal use and should be discouraged '' so is marijuana good or bad for your health there is evidence that demonstrates both the harms and health benefits of marijuana yet despite the emergence over the past couple of years of very comprehensive uptodate reviews of the scientific studies evaluating the benefits and harms of the drug its clear that more research is needed to fully determine the public health implications of rising marijuana use more research is needed to confirm the harms and benefits of marijuana use many scientists and health bodies including the american cancer society acs support the need for further scientific research on the use of marijuana and cannabinoids to treat medical conditions however there is an obstacle to this marijuana is classed as a schedule i controlled substance by the drug enforcement administration which deters the study of marijuana and cannabinoids through its imposition of strict conditions on the researchers working in this area if you happen to live in a state where medical use of marijuana is legal you and your doctor will need to carefully consider these factors and how they relate to your illness and health history before using this drug for instance while there is some evidence to support the use for marijuana for pain relief you should certainly avoid marijuana if you have a history of mental health problems remember to always speak to your doctor before taking a new medicinewith so many diet types to choose from how do we know which one will suit us best one problem that may face us is deciding whether to go lowfat or lowcarb what does research have to say about it one of the most difficult decisions when it comes to weight loss diets is picking one that will work well for you keto diets mediterranean diets fasting diets there are so many options out there for people who want to lose weight however choosing a diet is tricky how do we know which one will work best for us or if the diet will work at all researchers at the stanford university school of medicine in california have recently conducted a study exploring one key aspect of this `` best diet '' question whether lowfat or lowcarb diets are more effective what lead study author prof christopher gardner and colleagues found however might only make the matter more complicated '' weve all heard stories '' says prof gardner `` of a friend who went on one diet it worked great and then another friend tried the same diet and it didnt work at all its because were all very different and were just starting to understand the reasons for this diversity '' '' maybe we shouldnt be asking whats the best diet but whats the best diet for whom '' prof christopher gardner prof gardner and team worked with 609 people aged 18–50 with an almost 5050 maletofemale ratio the participants were split into two groups and randomly assigned one of two diets lowcarb or lowfat all of the study participants followed their assigned diet for a full year the results of the researchers study are now published in the journal jama opt for natural foods in order to gain a better understanding of the factors that might drive weight gain and weight loss prof gardner and team also sequenced the participants genomes in doing so they looked for gene patterns that they could associate with the effectiveness fat or carb metabolism another test measured all the subjects insulin levels which have previously been associated with weight gain in some people cant keep the weight off this may be why why are our bodies so stubborn when it comes to weight management a new study sheds light read now for the first 8 weeks of their respective diets the participants were instructed to consume no more than 20 grams of either fats or carbs per day this the authors explain would be the equivalent of one and a half slices of wholewheat bread for carbs or a large handful of nuts in the case of fats from the second month of their diet onward the participants were allowed to make adjustments as needed adding back 5 –15 grams of either carbs or fat little by little the purpose of these adjustments was to encourage the participants to strike a nutritional balance that they would be comfortable adhering to in the long run beyond the `` confines '' of the study '' we wanted them to choose '' says prof gardner `` a lowfat or lowcarb diet plan that they could potentially follow forever rather than a diet that theyd drop when the study ended '' as the year drew to a close those who had been following a lowfat diet had a daily fat intake of 57 grams on average compared with 87 grams per day before the start of the study those on a lowcarb diet had a daily carb intake of approximately 132 grams versus 247 grams before the study started participants lost an average of 13 pounds over the 1year period the scientists were pleased with the impact that the study had on the participants dietary health stressing that one of its main achievements was to encourage them to switch to healthful sources of fats and carbs '' we made sure to tell everybody '' adds prof gardner `` regardless of which diet they were on to go to the farmers market and dont buy processed convenience food also we advised them to diet in a way that didnt make them feel hungry or deprived '' study opens the door to further questions after measuring participants baseline insulin levels and weight loss progress throughout the study the researchers saw that although they had all transitioned to more healthful eating habits there was still a lot of individual variance when it came to weight loss thus while some participants lost more than 60 pounds others gained 15–20 pounds however the researchers were unable to find any links between gene patterns or insulin output and a persons likelihood of thriving on a lowfat versus lowcarb diet '' this study closes the door on some questions but it opens the door to others we have gobs of data that we can use in secondary exploratory studies '' prof gardner notes the researchers next step from here therefore will be to look at all the different data collected throughout the current study and try to understand how individual dietary needs might be calculated in the future '' i still think there is an opportunity to discover some personalization to it now we just need to work on tying the pieces together '' says prof gardner in the meantime the researchers encourage people on a weight loss journey to just be more mindful about what they eat since that will be the first step to a more healthful lifestyle '' on both sides referring to lowcarb and lowfat dieters we heard from people who had lost the most weight that we had helped them change their relationship to food and that now they were more thoughtful about how they ate '' prof gardner concludesintermittent fasting has been gaining popularity among people looking to shed extra kilograms and maintain a healthy weight researchers argue that this type of diet may also slow down aging and disease intermittent fasting can help with weight management but might it also bring other health benefits in intermittent fasting what essentially takes place in the body is that one source of energy which can facilitate the accumulation of body fat is switched for another our bodies run on glucose or simple sugar but when we fast for a longer period of time that energy source becomes unavailable our system needs to identify a different kind of `` fuel '' that is when the body begins to convert certain types of body fat into fatty acids which are easily absorbed by the blood fatty acids in turn produce molecules called ketones which the body uses as its new source of energy stephen anton a researcher at the university of florida college of medicine in gainesville calls this process `` flipping the metabolic switch '' '' this switch '' explains anton `` can happen after a certain period of time fasting its a gradation in which your metabolism over time shifts to use higher and higher amounts of ketones for energy '' he and his team were interested to learn more about how this switch occurs and whether it could bring other health benefits alongside weight management for this purpose they reviewed numerous recent studies focused on the mechanisms and benefits of intermittent fasting the teams review published in the journal obesity suggests that intermittent fasting may be more healthful than other dieting strategies as ketones put less stress on cells than the byproducts of other dieting styles significant weight loss regardless of style anton and his colleagues explain that the switch usually begins to take place after 8–12 hours of fasting though in the case of individuals who practice intermittent fasting the fasting strategies vary the researchers focused on the two most common types of intermittent fasting diets the first of which is based on time restrictions for eating in it the dieter may fast for a number of hours per day for instance 16 hours while allowing themselves to eat anything theyd like over the remaining hours how intermittent fasting can increase weight loss how does intermittent fasting work read now for the second type of intermittent fasting dieters may choose to alternate days of total fasting with days when no food is off limits or they may simply alternate days of frugal eating when individuals limit themselves to foods that equal only about 500 calories in all with days of unrestricted eating or `` feasting days '' `` of course '' anton notes `` we recommend healthy food during the feasting times '' the teams review of existing studies revealed that all in all any type of intermittent fasting diets are associated with significant weight loss in all 10 clinical trials assessing the effects of alternateday fasting the results conclusively pointed to this strategys effectiveness when it came to shedding extra kilos and 3 out of the 4 studies focused on the restricted timing type of intermittent fasting had similar results '' so in my mind its not a question of whether it works for producing fat loss '' says anton whats more interesting and more important is what kind of tissue is lost through intermittent fasting additional potential health benefits most of the studies reviewed by anton and team revealed that while participants did lose body fat no significant amount of lean tissue which includes organ tissue muscular tissue and bone tissue was lost this is important since lean tissue allows our bodies to keep on functioning well and other types of dieting strategies anton notes lead to significant loss of both fat and lean tissue which may affect health in the long run studies into the effect of the switch from glucosedriven energy to ketonedriven energy in rodents and other animals suggests that intermittent fasting could also have other health benefits the scientists say the researchers say that it could help to prolong the lifespan improve the functioning of metabolic processes protect cognitive function enhance physical performance reduce harmful instances of inflammation and shield against cardiovascular diseases '' an important takeaway is that we all have the ability to switch our metabolism from glucose to ketone utilization and that switch has the potential to have profound health benefits for us in addition to the positive changes in body composition '' stephen anton still the authors warn against starting intermittent fasting without first asking for a doctors advice this dieting style may not be equally beneficial for everyone and in some cases it could do more harm than good he cautionsemerging evidence suggests that a `` potent '' drug could prevent the development of alzheimers disease but only if a person takes the medication long before symptoms of this condition make an appearance an existing drug may be able to stop alzheimers onset researchers say alzheimers disease is the most common form of dementia according to the centers for disease control and prevention cdc an estimated 57 million adults in the united states live with this condition unfortunately there is no cure for alzheimers and following disease onset symptoms tend to worsen progressively then the question `` can specialists prevent the disease in people deemed at increased risk '' arises the authors of a new study from the university of virginia in charlottesville suggest that one drug called memantine which is currently used to manage alzheimers symptoms may actually help prevent the disease this however might only happen if a person takes the drug before symptoms set in '' based on what weve learned so far it is my opinion that we will never be able to cure alzheimers disease by treating patients once they become symptomatic '' says prof george bloom of the university of virginia who oversaw the study '' the best hope for conquering this disease is to first recognize patients who are at risk and begin treating them prophylactically with new drugs and perhaps lifestyle adjustments that would reduce the rate at which the silent phase of the disease progresses '' he says adding `` ideally we would prevent it from starting in the first place '' the journal alzheimers dementia has now published the teams findings the cell cycle reentry process the researchers explain that alzheimers disease actually begins long before symptoms start to show perhaps even a decade or longer in advance one of the conditions characteristics is that once affected by the disease brain cells attempt to divide possibly in order to balance out the death of other neurons only to die anyway in any case the further division of fully formed brain cells is unusual and does not happen in a healthy brain the affected neurons attempt at division is called the `` cell cycle reentry process '' '' its been estimated that as much as 90 percent of neuron death that occurs in the alzheimers brain follows this cell cycle reentry process which is an abnormal attempt to divide '' explains prof bloom more potent alzheimers therapy is on its way recent advances in alzheimers research are speeding up the process of designing better therapies read now '' by the end of the course of the disease the patient will have lost about 30 percent of the neurons in the frontal lobes of the brain '' he estimates study coauthor erin kodis prof blooms former doctoral student formed her own hypothesis about what triggers this mechanism excess calcium she believes enters neurons through special receptors called nmda receptors on the cells surface this drives brain cells to start dividing following a series of laboratory experiments kodis confirmed that her hypothesis was correct this mechanism is set in motion before the formation of amyloid plaques which are characteristic of alzheimers disease in the brain eventually however molecules of an amino acid called beta amyloid stick together to form toxic amyloid plaques memantine may have potent properties kodis saw that when neurons encounter beta amyloid molecules in the early stages that precede plaque buildup nmda receptors open to receive the excess calcium that ultimately leads to their destruction but then the researcher made another discovery the drug memantine prevented cell cycle reentry by closing the nmda receptors on the surface of neurons '' the experiments suggest that memantine might have potent diseasemodifying properties if it could be administered to patients long before they have become symptomatic and diagnosed with alzheimers disease '' prof george bloom '' perhaps this could prevent the disease or slow its progression long enough that the average age of symptom onset could be significantly later if it happens at all '' prof bloom adds these findings are particularly promising memantine has few known side effects and those that have been reported are rare and do not have a major impact on an individuals wellbeing prof bloom believes that in the future a useful preventive approach might be to screen people for telling signs that they are exposed to alzheimers as early as possible specialists could then prescribe memantine to those at an increased risk of the disease he says people may have to take the drug throughout their lives to keep alzheimers at bay or at least in check '' i dont want to raise false hopes '' says prof bloom however he continues `` if this idea of using memantine as a prophylactic pans out it will be because we now understand that calcium is one of the agents that gets the disease started and we may be able to stop or slow the process if done very early '' currently prof bloom and colleagues are planning a clinical trial to test the preventive strategy that they outlined in the studyfor many cancers diagnosis is a long and challenging process a new blood test however could offer a muchneeded simpler and more effective diagnostic technique called cancerseek it has the potential to identify eight cancer types from one blood sample researchers have created a blood test that could detect eight cancer types in the new study researchers reveal how the blood test demonstrated high sensitivity and specificity for cancer detection in more than 1000 people with the disease the team from the johns hopkins university school of medicine in baltimore md recently published their results in the journal science worldwide cancer remains one of the leading causes of death it is estimated that by 2030 the number of cancer deaths will have risen from 8 million to 13 million early diagnosis is key to reducing cancerrelated deaths the earlier the disease is diagnosed the higher the chances of treatment success but sadly many cancers are not caught until the later stages and this is largely due to a lack of fast and effective diagnostic tools however the johns hopkins researchers believe that cancerseek could bring us closer to a quick simple way to detect cancer in its early stages test produced high sensitivity and specificity when cancerous tumors form they release small fragments of mutated dna and proteins into the bloodstream and these can act as markers for cancer the new blood test works by identifying the markers for 16 gene mutations and eight proteins that are associated with eight different cancer types these include breast lung and colorectal cancer as well as five cancers ovarian liver stomach pancreatic and esophageal for which there are currently no routine screening tests for people at average risk '' a novelty of our classification method is that it combines the probability of observing various dna mutations together with the levels of several proteins in order to make the final call '' explains study coauthor cristian tomasetti phd an associate professor of oncology and biostatistics at johns hopkins university how gum disease could lead to cancer researchers shed light on how gum disease can fuel cancer read now for their study the researchers tested cancerseek on 1005 individuals who had been diagnosed with nonmetastatic forms of one of the eight cancers they found that the test was able to identify 70 percent of the cancers with sensitivity ranging from 33 percent for breast cancer to 98 percent for ovarian cancer sensitivity ranged from 69 percent to 98 percent for the five cancers that currently have no routine screening tests the researchers report in terms of specificity the test yielded an overall result of more than 99 percent on testing cancerseek on 812 healthy adults it only produced seven falsepositive results as study coauthor kenneth kinzler phd codirector of the ludwig center for cancer genetics and therapeutics at johns hopkins notes `` very high specificity was essential because falsepositive results can subject patients to unnecessary invasive followup tests and procedures to confirm the presence of cancer '' what is more the researchers found that their test was able to pinpoint the location of tumors for 83 percent of patients test could substantially impact patients the researchers note that larger studies will now be needed to further determine the efficacy of cancerseek as a routine screening test for cancer and such studies are in the pipeline however the team believes that the results of its current research are encouraging '' this has the potential to substantially impact patients earlier detection provides many ways to improve outcomes for patients '' says study coauthor dr anne marie lennon phd who is an associate professor of medicine surgery and radiology at johns hopkins '' optimally cancers would be detected early enough that they could be cured by surgery alone but even cancers that are not curable by surgery alone will respond better to systemic therapies when there is less advanced disease '' she adds the team hopes that cancerseek will one day offer a simple noninvasive and fast strategy for diagnosing cancer in its early stages '' this test represents the next step in changing the focus of cancer research from late stage disease to early disease which i believe will be critical to reducing cancer deaths in the longterm '' study coauthor dr bert vogelstein johns hopkins university school of medicinethey are usually marketed as a safe alternative to conventional cigarettes but a new study suggests that ecigarettes may still pose serious harm to health researchers suggest that ecigarettes may increase the risk of cancer and heart disease researchers at the new york university school of medicine in new york city found that mice exposed to electronic cigaratte ecigarette vapor experienced dna damage in the lungs bladder and heart which could increase the risk of cancer and heart disease such damage was also found in cultured human lung and bladder cells that had been exposed to ecigarette vapor for the equivalent of 10 years study coauthor moonshong tang of the department of environmental medicine at the new york university school of medicine and his colleagues recently reported their findings in the proceedings of the national academy of sciences ecigarettes also known as ecigs have soared in popularity in recent years particularly among teenagers and young adults according to the centers for disease control and prevention cdc more than 2 million middle and high school students in the united states report having used ecigarettes in the past 30 days ecigarettes are not approved by the food and drug administration fda as a quitsmoking aid after the us preventive services task force concluded that there is `` insufficient evidence to recommend for or against their use for smoking cessation '' however research has found that more than 80 percent of smokers believe that ecigarettes could help them to quit while more than 97 percent believe that the batterypowered devices can help to reduce the use of conventional tobacco the debate over ecigarette safety when it comes to our health the cdc believe that ecigarettes are not as harmful as conventional ones still because ecigarettes are relatively new to the market precisely how harmful they are remains unclear that said we are learning more and more about the potential dangers of ecigarette use or `` vaping '' the pros and cons of ecigarettes revealed a new report details the potential benefits and risks of ecigarette use read now in 2017 medical news today reported on a study that linked the flavorings in ecigarette liquid to impaired heart muscle function a more recent report claims that there is `` substantial evidence '' that ecigarette use increases heart rate and that some chemicals in the vapor can harm dna the study by tang and team provides further evidence of the harms of ecigarettes after finding that exposure to ecigarette vapor can damage dna in a way that could cause cancer and heart disease ecigarette vapor caused dna damage the researchers came to their findings by exposing 10 male mice to ecigarette vapor containing 10 milligrams of nicotine which is comparable with what humans inhale for 3 hours per day 5 days per week for 12 weeks when compared with a control group of mice that inhaled filtered air they found that the mice exposed to ecigarette vapor showed dna damage in their heart lungs and bladder what is more the scientists found that exposure to ecigarette vapor halted dna repair processes in the lung tissue of mice they found the same outcomes when testing longterm exposure to ecigarette vapor on human lung and bladder cells in conclusion to their findings tang and colleagues write '' based on these results we propose that ecs ecigarette smoke is carcinogenic and that ecig smokers have a higher risk than nonsmokers to develop lung and bladder cancer and heart diseases '' critics of the research however claim that this study does not prove that ecigarettes are harmful to health talking to the guardian peter hajek the director of the tobacco dependence research unit at queen mary university of london in the united kingdom says that the `` study shows nothing at all about the dangers of vaping '' he continues saying `` it doesnt show that vaping causes cancer this is one in a long line of false alarms which may be putting people off the switch from smoking to vaping which would undoubtedly be of great benefit to them '' it seems that the jury is out on whether or not vaping can cause cancer and heart disease but one thing is clear more studies are needed to find outbreaking research concludes that the use of two existing drugs could successfully treat certain lung cancers the study delves deep into the molecular survival kit of lung tumors understanding how lung tumors survive and grow leads to an innovative new treatment lung cancer is now the leading cause of cancer death in the united states responsible for almost 160000 deaths each year many are driven by the kras oncogene kras is an essential gene but in its mutant form it is an important step in the generation of many types of cancer for over 30 years the kras oncogene has been a focus of research finding a way to remove its teeth would be pivotal in the treatment of a range of cancers as part of this effort rather than targeting the gene directly some scientists have focused on pathways that are related to the errant gene one pathway of interest centers on insulin and insulinlike growth factor1 igf1 this pathway helps to regulate the uptake of nutrients into the cell providing it with the energy and raw ingredients it needs to grow if the tumor cells fuel supply could be severed its onward march might be halted however it is not clear whether kras oncogenes are reliant on this particular pathway and in clinical trials results have not been encouraging in fact one study in mice found that lung tumors actually became more aggressive after the pathway was suppressed attacking krasrelated pathways undeterred a team from the boston childrens hospital in massachusetts used a fresh approach in the mouse study mentioned above the insulinigf1 signaling pathway was only partially closed off in the latest study though a genetic technique was used that shut it down entirely to do this the scientists crossed two strains of genetically modified mice the first is a wellused model for krasdriven lung cancer and the other is a mouse used to study diabetes that lacks insulinigf1 signaling in the diabetes mouse model the insulinigf1 pathway is unshackled by the deletion of two genes irs1 and irs2 these encode `` adaptor '' proteins which are essential for the smooth running of the insulinigf1 pathway '' our study uses a robust way to block insulinigf1 signaling and addresses a longstanding question in krasmutant lung cancer when you use genetics results can be more conclusive '' senior study author nada kalaany phd an assistant professor at harvard medical school boston ma using their new model the scientists demonstrated that by suppressing the two adaptor proteins insulinigf1 signaling is blocked and lung tumors are significantly suppressed '' almost all animals in this lung cancer model typically die within 15 weeks of kras activation '' says kalaany `` but the ones that lost both irs1 and irs2 were completely fine we saw almost no tumors at 10 to 15 weeks '' this finding is important because drugs that block insulinigf1 signaling are already in use and freely available the results are published this week in the proceedings of the national academy of sciences while the preliminary findings are hopeful the researchers knew that there was more work to be done cancer is a complex evermorphing disease with a terrifying knack for circumventing medical interventions outfoxing lung cancer to observe whether the cancer cells were able to navigate around this new roadblock the team let the animals live longer to see what happened next as kalaany explains `` sure enough at around 16 weeks we started seeing some tumors so then we asked how were these tumor cells able to overcome loss of irs1 and irs2 '' how lung cancer cells disguise themselves to evade chemo by adopting the traits of cells from other major organs lung cancer cells can escape chemotherapy read now the answer was found in the levels of essential cellular building blocks amino acids tumor cells lacking the adaptor proteins failed to move amino acids into their cells despite a plentiful supply outside of the cell '' growth factors like igf1 tell cells that nutrients are around '' says kalaany `` so when you suppress their signaling the tumor cells dont take up the amino acids and think they are starved '' '' but we found that the tumor cells can compensate for this and break down their own proteins to generate amino acids '' so the krasdriven tumors threw out a curve ball they had once again figured out a workaround by breaking themselves down in a process known as autophagy they can generate the raw material they need to thrive the researchers however were one step ahead heading cancer off at the pass drugs that inhibit protein breakdown are already available these include chloroquine which is currently involved in a number of cancer drug trials and bortezomib which blocks proteasomes proteindigesting structures and is already used to treat myeloma when the two prongs of the attack were combined the results were more than encouraging they found that tumor cells lacking irs1 and irs2 did not grow well and when the inhibitors were added growth stopped almost completely additional studies will now be needed to understand how these two drug types might interact in a patient however this is a considerable breakthrough and the researchers are excited to take it to the next phase '' our work tries to identify metabolic dependencies and vulnerabilities in tumors '' says kalaany `` if we identify collaborators we would love to have a clinical trial in nonsmallcell lung cancer combining igf1 inhibitors with autophagy inhibitors or proteasome inhibitors '' by testing to breaking point every part of a tumor cells survival kit researchers will one day beat cancerhigh blood pressure or hypertension is a major risk factor for heart disease the leading cause of death in the united states but a new study has found that two classes of medication that are commonly used to lower blood pressure could present a death risk all on their own researchers have identified two blood pressure drugs that could raise mortality risk scientists at the intermountain medical center heart institute in salt lake city ut found that individuals with hypertension who used alpha blockers and alpha2 agonists to control their blood pressure showed an increase in blood pressure variability which could increase mortality risk lead study author dr brian clements and team have recently presented their findings at the 2018 american college of cardiology acc scientific sessions held in orlando fl blood pressure is the force of blood that pushes against the wall of the arteries and in november last year the american heart association aha and the acc set new guidelines now a person is considered to have hypertension if their systolic blood pressure the top number is 130 millimeters of mercury mmhg or higher and their diastolic blood pressure the bottom number is 80 mmhg or higher systolic blood pressure is the force of blood against the artery walls when the heart is beating while diastolic blood pressure is the force of blood when the heart is at rest or between heartbeats the updated guidelines mean that almost half of adults in the united states have high blood pressure which puts them at greater risk of heart attack stroke and heart disease among other health problems of course when it comes to treating hypertension the goal is to lower blood pressure this may be achieved through lifestyle changes such as adopting a healthful diet and increasing physical activity medication or both previous research however has discovered that consistency is key for blood pressure levels a study published in the bmj in 2016 for example associated higher variability of systolic blood pressure with a 15 percent increase in allcause mortality according to the new study from dr clements and colleagues certain types of medication that are used to lower blood pressure may be contributing to this mortality risk two medications should be avoided for their study the researchers analyzed the data of over 10500 adults with high blood pressure the participants had their blood pressure measured at least seven times between january 2007 and december 2011 and the type of blood pressure medication they were using was monitored common blood pressure drug raises skin cancer risk researchers reveal how a blood pressure medication may increase the risk of skin cancer read now the team used these data to assess whether certain classes of blood pressure medication were associated with variability in blood pressure levels the study revealed two classes of blood pressure medication that were linked to higher blood pressure variability in subjects alpha blockers and alpha2 agonists alpha blockers which include doxazosin mesylate and prazosin hydrochloride work by dilating the blood vessels alpha2 agonists such as methyldopa work by targeting sympathetic nervous system activity thereby reducing blood vessel constriction based on the study results dr clements and colleagues say that these two medications should not be used to treat hypertension '' patients should know what their blood pressure is '' he says `` and if its up and down all the time the patient should work with their physician to explore options for the best blood pressure medications that will reduce variances '' '' where possible the two types of medications that show an increase in variances should be avoided '' dr brian clements dr clements adds that ace inhibitors angiotensin receptor blockers calcium channel blockers and thiazide diuretics may be safer treatment options for people with hypertension `` people who are on other types of blood pressure medications have an increased risk of death '' he adds however blood pressure variability is not solely down to medication dr clements notes that the way in which blood pressure is measured can have a significant effect on readings '' because of the variables that affect blood pressure measurements '' says dr clements `` finding ways to more accurately measure blood pressure can better identify effective treatments for patients who have hypertension '' for accurate blood pressure readings he recommends sitting or laying down for 15 minutes before measurements are taken avoiding stressful situations and using a wellfitting blood pressure cuff may also helpa new study reveals that individuals with higher levels of belly fat and larger waistlines are more likely to have lower vitamin d levels where fat is stored on the body may impact vitamin d levels currently in medical circles vitamin d is the talk of the town produced in our skin on contact with sunlight it plays a myriad of roles in the human body in the past few months medical news today have covered a wealth of research into the group of fatsoluble secosteroids more commonly known as vitamin d for instance recent studies have found that vitamin d might protect against heart failure diabetes and cancer and that vitamin d deficiency causes hair loss vitamin d deficiency has traditionally been linked to bone health but it may also have a role to play in respiratory tract infections and autoimmune disease among others with more than 40 percent of the population of the united states being vitamin d deficient this is a serious issue some authors have referred to it as `` an ignored epidemic '' estimating that over 1 billion people worldwide have inadequate levels vitamin d and belly fat exposed they discovered that in women both total and abdominal fat were associated with lower vitamin d levels but that abdominal fat had the greatest impact in men however lower vitamin d levels were significantly linked with fat in the liver and abdomen across both sexes more belly fat predicted lower levels of vitamin d rafiq explains `` the strong relationship between increasing amounts of abdominal fat and lower levels of vitamin d suggests that individuals with larger waistlines are at a greater risk of developing deficiency and should consider having their vitamin d levels checked '' her next step is to understand why this relationship exists does a deficiency in vitamin d cause fat to be stored in the abdominal region or does belly fat decrease levels of vitamin d it will take more work to tease apart cause and effect as rafiq explains `` due to the observational nature of this study we can not draw a conclusion on the direction or cause of the association between obesity and vitamin d levels '' '' however this strong association may point to a possible role for vitamin d in abdominal fat storage and function '' rachida rafiq the links between obesity and vitamin d deficiency are growing increasingly robust the next challenge is working out a way to effectively tackle this issuebaking soda has been used as a home remedy for generations due to its antacid properties yet its benefits run even deeper and new research may explain why it is an effective aid in the treatment of autoimmune diseases such as arthritis how can this kitchen staple change the bodys inflammatory response baking soda also called sodium bicarbonate is a kitchen staple commonly used as a raising agent for cakes that being said it has also made a name for itself as a home remedy for various conditions half a teaspoon of baking soda is often taken to ease heartburn or acid reflux for example and this substance is also used to whiten teeth in a new study whose findings are now published in the journal of immunology researchers from the medical college of georgia at augusta university reveal exactly how drinking a solution of baking soda could prime the immune system against inflammatory diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis paul oconnor a renal physiologist at augusta university and colleagues tested the effects that drinking a baking soda solution would have first on rats and then on humans their experiments tell a complex story about how this salt provides a signal to a special kind of cell called `` mesothelial cells '' telling them that the body is fine and not under attack rendering an aggressive immune system unnecessary thus harmful autoimmune responses are averted baking soda and mesothelial cells mesothelial cells line the internal organs as well as many different cavities in the body not only do they prevent organs and other internal tissue from sticking together they also serve other functions not all of which have been studied in detail in the new study oconnor and team tested the effect that a baking soda solution would have first on rats and then on healthy human participants and they noted that it influenced an intriguing mechanism can this biochemical switch off inflammation researchers may have found a way to `` switch off '' certain immune cells when necessary read now baking soda `` prompts '' the stomach to produce more gastric acid which allows it to digest food quicker and easier but in addition to this it also seems to tell the mesothelial cells that line the spleen to `` take it easy '' because there is no threat basically in oconnor words mesothelial cells learn that `` its most likely a hamburger not a bacterial infection '' so they in turn do not activate the spleens `` army '' of macrophages or white blood cells tasked with clearing up potentially harmful cellular detritus '' certainly drinking bicarbonate affects the spleen and we think its through the mesothelial cells '' oconnor explains mesothelial cells communicate with the organs they line using small projections called microvilli and the medium through which they send their message is the neurotransmitter acetylcholine from inflammatory to antiinflammatory so what actually happens the study authors note that those who drank the baking soda solution experienced a shift in the kinds of immune cells activated in the spleen in fact proinflammatory macrophages m1 dwindled in number while the levels of antiinflammatory cells m2 rose the same kinds of cells are also housed in the blood and kidneys and baking soda happens to be used in the treatment of chronic kidney disease this idea prompted the new studys authors to explore the mechanisms through which this substance might help to improve renal function '' we started thinking how does baking soda slow progression of kidney disease '' says oconnor at first the researchers analyzed the effects of the baking soda solution on a rat model of kidney disease and then again on healthy rats which acted as the control sample this is when the researchers noticed that the levels of m1 cells in the kidneys dropped while those of m2 cells increased both the rats with kidney disease and the healthy rats presented the same development and it was this shift that flagged up the notion that baking soda could influence the inflammatory response at cellular level when the researchers recruited healthy medical students and asked them to drink the baking soda solution it became apparent the antiinflammatory effect of this substance happened in the spleen as well as in the blood '' the shift from inflammatory to an antiinflammatory profile is happening everywhere we saw it in the kidneys we saw it in the spleen now we see it in the peripheral blood '' paul oconnor safe way to treat inflammatory disease one of the authors main revelations was the fact that it was the mesothelial cells that mediated the antiinflammatory signals an existing working theory had been that signals were transmitted to the relevant cells through the vagus nerve a long cranial nerve that communicates with the heart lungs and various organs in the abdomen but experiments revealed that this idea was incorrect when the scientists tried cutting off this nerve this did not affect the behavior of the mesothelial cells instead it became apparent that these cells had a more direct communication with the organs they lined than previously thought oconnor and his team became aware of this when they noted that moving the spleen affected mesothelial cells that lined it and the signals modulating the inflammatory response were lost '' we think the cholinergic acetylcholine signals that we know mediate this antiinflammatory response arent coming directly from the vagal nerve innervating the spleen but from the mesothelial cells that form these connections to the spleen '' explains oconnor the results begin to provide an answer as to why baking soda can help with autoimmune diseases including arthritis and further research into these mechanisms could help to optimize the results obtained through this common compound '' its potentially a really safe way to treat inflammatory disease '' oconnor concludesanxiety disorders are common across the united states thought to affect around 40 million adults each year however as if these feelings of worry and fear arent enough to contend with a new study suggests that older people who have worsening anxiety symptoms may be more likely to develop alzheimers disease researchers have linked increasing anxiety symptoms in older age to higher levels of a protein linked to alzheimers researchers found that increasing symptoms of anxiety were linked to higher levels of betaamyloid which is a protein associated with alzheimers disease in the brains of older people with normal cognitive functioning first study author dr nancy donovan who is a geriatric psychiatrist at brigham and womens hospital in boston ma and team say that the results suggest that a rise in the sypmtoms of anxiety could be an early sign of alzheimers the findings were recently published in the american journal of psychiatry alzheimers disease is a form of dementia characterized by problems with memory and thinking as well as changes in behavior it is estimated that around 55 million people in the us are living with alzheimers of whom around 54 million are over the age of 65 the precise causes of alzheimers disease remain unclear but scientists believe that betaamyloid plays a key role this is a protein that can form `` plaques '' which have been found to block nerve cell communication in the brains of people with alzheimers these plaques are considered to be a hallmark of the disease and research has suggested that an increase in betaamyloid levels can occur up to 10 years before the onset of alzheimers symptoms according to the new study anxiety could play a significant role in increased betaamyloid levels among older adults targeting anxiety may slow alzheimers previous studies have suggested that depression and anxiety might be indicators of alzheimers since symptoms of these mental health conditions often occur in the early stages of the disease for their study dr donovan and colleagues sought to determine whether or not betaamyloid might play a role in this association alzheimers tripleaction diabetes drug shows promise as treatment researchers reveal how a diabetes drug could help to treat alzheimers read now the research included 270 adults between age 62 and 90 with normal cognitive functioning all of whom underwent positron emission tomography at study baseline and annually during 5 years of followup in order to determine levels of betaamyloid in their brains symptoms of anxiety and depression among the adults were assessed using the 30item geriatric depression scale it was found that adults who showed an increase in anxiety symptoms over 5 years of followup also had higher levels of betaamyloid in their brains the researchers say that this indicates that worsening anxiety might be an early sign of alzheimers disease '' if further research substantiates anxiety as an early indicator it would be important for not only identifying people early on with the disease but also treating it and potentially slowing or preventing the disease process early on '' dr nancy donovan the scientists point out that followup studies are required to determine whether older adults who experience an increase in anxiety symptoms actually go on to develop alzheimersnew results could change the face of alzheimers treatment the herpes simplex virus is found to play a vital role in the condition and antiherpetic medication is shown to have a dramatic effect on dementia risk alzheimers disease may soon be treated with antiviral medication last month medical news today reported on a study that found `` strong evidence '' that viruses are involved in alzheimers disease the postmortem analyses of brain tissue found that people who lived with this dementia type also had more herpesviruses 6 and 7 than people without alzheimers now a scientific commentary suggests that the study that mnt covered is not the only one to pinpoint a link between herpes and dementia in fact three more studies have strengthened this link and the commentary recently published in the journal of alzheimers disease – takes a look at all three ruth itzhaki who is a professor of neuroscience and experimental psychology at the university of manchester in the united kingdom alongside richard lathe who is a professor in the division of infection and pathway medicine at the university of edinburgh also in the uk authored the commentary remarkable magnitude of antiviral effect the studies referenced in the commentary are two articles tsai et al 2017 and chen et al 2018 that suggest that acute herpes zoster infection puts people at a higher risk of dementia and one article that shows that aggressive treatment with antiherpetic medication drastically lowers dementia risk the latter study deemed `` most important '' by profs itzhaki and lathe examined 8362 people aged 50 and above who received a diagnosis of herpes simplex virus hsv infection as well as a control group of 25086 agematched healthy people breakthrough researchers fix alzheimers gene by correcting the faulty apoe4 gene researchers were able to erase its damaging effects on the brain read now the two groups were followed for almost a decade between 2001 and 2010 in the herpes group the risk of dementia was over 25 times higher than in the control group significantly the study also revealed that aggressive antiviral treatment reduced the relative risk of dementia by 10 times prof lathe comments on these new findings saying `` not only is the magnitude of the antiviral effect remarkable but also the fact that despite the relatively brief duration and the timing of treatment in most patients severely affected by hsv1 it appeared to prevent the longterm damage in the brain that results in alzheimers '' '' this article and two others provide the first population evidence for a causal link between herpes virus infection and alzheimers disease a hugely important finding '' prof ruth itzhaki '' i believe we are the first to realize the implications of these striking data on this devastating condition which principally affects the elderly '' prof itzhaki adds '' but '' she says `` we believe that these safe and easily available antivirals may have a strong part to play in combating the disease in these patients '' she also suggests that in the future it may be possible to prevent the disease `` by vaccination against the virus in infancy '' '' successful treatment by a specific drug or successful vaccination against the putative microbe are the only ways to prove that a microbe is the cause of a noninfectious human disease '' says prof itzhakiwith marijuana legalization on the rise an increasing number of studies are exploring the drugs potential harms and benefits however a new study suggests that when it comes to brain health alcohol is more damaging researchers say that alcohol causes more damage to the brain than marijuana does scientists at the university of colorado boulder conducted a review of existing imaging data that looked at the effects of alcohol and marijuana or cannabis on the brain their findings linked alcohol consumption with longterm changes to the structure of white matter and gray matter in the brain the use of marijuana however seemed to have no significant longterm effects on brain structure study leader rachel thayer of the department of psychology and neuroscience at the university of colorado boulder and colleagues recently reported their results in the journal addiction it is estimated that around 222 million people in the united states have used marijuana in the past month making it `` the most commonly used illicit drug '' in the country across the us however it is increasingly becoming legalized for both medicinal and recreational purposes as a result of this changing legislation researchers have been trying to find out more about how marijuana may benefit health as well as the damage that it could cause last year for example medical news today reported on a study linking marijuana use to a greater risk of psychosis in teenagers while another study claimed that the drug is `` worse than cigarettes '' for cardiovascular health on the other side of the coin researchers have found that cannabinoids which are the active compounds in marijuana could help to prevent migraine and a more recent study linked marijuana use to an increased sex drive marijuana vs alcohol which is worse for this latest study thayer and colleagues sought to learn more about how marijuana use affects the brain study coauthor kent hutchison also of the department of psychology and neuroscience notes that to date studies that have investigated this association have produced mixed results '' when you look at these studies going back years '' he explains `` you see that one study will report that marijuana use is related to a reduction in the volume of the hippocampus the next study then comes around and they say that marijuana use is related to changes in the cerebellum `` teen marijuana use may lead to bipolar symptoms later on researchers have linked marijuana use in adolescence to a greater risk of bipolar symptoms read now '' the point is that theres no consistency across all of these studies in terms of the actual brain structures '' with the aim of closing the gap on this inconsistency the researchers conducted a new analysis on existing brain imaging data they looked at how marijuana use affects white matter and gray matter in the brain and how its effects compare with another `` drug '' that we have become so accustomed to alcohol gray matter is the tissue on the brains surface that primarily consists of nerve cell bodies white matter is the deeper brain tissue that contains myelinated nerve fibers which are branches protruding from nerve cells that transmit electrical impulses to other cells and tissues the team notes that any reduction in the size of white or gray matter or a loss in their integrity can lead to impairments in brain functioning '' with alcohol weve known its bad for the brain for decades '' notes hutchison `` but for cannabis we know so little '' marijuana use had no impact the study included the brain images of 853 adults who were aged between 18 and 55 years and 439 teenagers between the ages of 14 and 18 all participants varied in their use of alcohol and marijuana the researchers found that alcohol use particularly in adults who had been drinking for many years was associated with a reduction in gray matter volume as well as a reduction in the integrity of white matter marijuana use however appeared to have no impact on the structure of gray or white matter in either teenagers or adults based on these findings the researchers believe that drinking alcohol is likely to be much more harmful to brain health than using marijuana '' while marijuana may also have some negative consequences it definitely is nowhere near the negative consequences of alcohol '' kent hutchison when it comes to the possible benefits of marijuana use however thayer and her team note that the jury is still out and further research is needed to reach some conclusionsa form of intermittent fasting known as the 168 diet helps obese individuals to lose weight and lower their blood pressure according to a new study timerestricted eating may be the key to weight loss more and more people now turn to intermittent fasting as a fast and effective way to lose weight there are different form of this diet depending on the time intervals of `` fasting '' and `` feasting '' the socalled 52 diet for instance consists of eating normally for 5 days every week and fasting for 2 days in the fasting days the dieter restricts their calorie intake to 500 or 600 per day in daily fasting or the 168 diet people eat whatever they like for 8 hours and fast for the remaining 16 a new study evaluates the benefits of this 168 pattern for obese individuals and finds that not only does the diet work but also that it helps to lower blood pressure as many as 933 million adults have obesity in the united states according to the latest data from the centers for disease control and prevention cdc thats almost 40 percent of the countrys entire population this research was led by corresponding author krista varady an associate professor of kinesiology and nutrition at the university of illinois at chicago and the findings were published in the journal nutrition and healthy aging losing weight without counting calories varady and colleagues recruited 23 obese study participants who were aged 45 years on average with an average body mass index bmi of 35 between 10 am and 6 pm the participants could eat whatever and however much they liked but they were only allowed to drink water and caloriefree drinks for the remaining 16 hours intermittent fasting may have profound health benefits some researchers say that this type of diet can also slow down aging and stave off disease read now all the study participants were followed for a period of 12 weeks and their dieting outcomes were compared with those of a previous weight loss trial of another type of intermittent fasting called `` alternate day fasting '' in alternate day fasting they can eat whatever they like for one day and fast for the following day on average when compared with the control trial those on the 168 diet consumed 350 fewer calories lost 3 percent of their weight and had lower blood pressure more specifically the systolic blood pressure of those who fasted daily dropped by an average of 7 millimeters of mercury however insulin resistance cholesterol and fat mass remained the same between the two compared groups as varady and her colleagues conclude `` these preliminary data offer promise for the use of timerestricted feeding as a weight loss technique in obese adults but longerterm largescale randomized controlled trials are required '' the studys corresponding author also comments on the significance of the findings saying `` the results we saw in this study are similar to the results weve seen in other studies on alternate day fasting '' '' but '' she adds `` one of the benefits of the 168 diet may be that it is easier for people to maintain we observed that fewer participants dropped out of this study when compared to studies on other fasting diets '' '' the takehome message from this study is that there are options for weight loss that do not include calorie counting or eliminating certain foods '' krista varady '' the 168 diet is another tool for weight loss that we now have preliminary scientific evidence to support '' varady concludes `` when it comes to weight loss people need to find what works for them because even small amounts of success can lead to improvements in metabolic health ''fish oil is hailed for its plentiful health benefits but new research suggests that the longterm consumption of fish oil or sunflower oil may increase the risk of fatty liver disease later in life researchers say that lifelong intake of fish oil or sunflower oil could raise the risk of fatty liver disease in later life by studying rats researchers found that lifelong intake of sunflower oil or fish oil led to changes in the liver that make the organ vulnerable to nonalcoholic steatohepatitis nash nash is a more serious form of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease nafld study coauthor josé luis quiles a professor of physiology working at the university of granada in spain and colleagues recently reported their findings in the journal of nutritional biochemistry it is estimated that around 20 percent of people in the united states who have nafld also have nash and the condition becomes more common with age nash is characterized by a buildup of fat in the liver which is not caused by alcohol consumption inflammation and liver cell damage the liver damage that occurs in nash can increase the risk of liver cirrhosis and liver cancer some of the key risk factors for nash include overweight and obesity high blood pressure high cholesterol and type 2 diabetes which are factors heavily influenced by diet studying how dietary fats affect the liver building on the link between diet and nash the new study from prof quiles and his colleagues suggests that the type of oils we consume could play a role in our laterlife risk of the condition the researchers came to their findings by analyzing the effects of different dietary fats including sunflower oil fish oil and virgin olive oil on rat livers in detail the team looked at how lifelong intake of each of these oils impacted the structure of the rodents livers as well as their effects on gene expression liver fibrosis or scarring oxidative stress and the length of telomeres kiwi compound may prevent nonalcoholic fatty liver disease research suggests that nafld could be prevented with a compound found in kiwi read now oxidative stress is defined as an imbalance between free radicals which are molecules that can damage cells and the bodys ability to `` deoxidize '' these molecules and prevent their harmful effects telomeres are `` caps '' at the end of each strand of dna and they protect our chromosomes the shorter our telomeres the greater the damage to our cells research has shown that a reduction in telomere length plays a key role in cellular aging and agerelated disease telomeres that are too long however can increase the risk of cancer additionally the team looked at how the liver evolves with age as a result of the different dietary fats consumed olive oil best for a healthy liver the researchers not only found that liver fat accumulates with age but they also revealed that the type of fat that builds up on the liver is influenced by the type of fats that we eat as prof quiles points out `` this means that regardless of this accumulation some livers age in a healthier way than others and with a greater or lesser predisposition to certain diseases '' the study revealed that fish oil and sunflower oil negatively impacted the liver health of the rats lifelong sunflower oil intake was found to trigger liver fibrosis and it also altered the structure of the organ led to changes in gene expression and increased oxidation in liver cells rats that had a lifelong intake of fish oil demonstrated an increase in agerelated cell oxidation in their livers the team reports and they also experienced a decrease in electron transport chain activity in the mitochondria the `` powerhouses '' of the cell which impairs cell function fish oil also led to an increase in relative telomere length in the liver the researchers report olive oil however was found to cause the least damage to the liver taken together the team says these findings indicate that virgin olive oil might be the best dietary fat for laterlife liver health '' the alterations caused by the longterm consumption of sunflower and fish oils make the liver susceptible to nonalcoholic steatohepatitis a very serious disease that may act as a catalyst for other liver diseases such as cirrhosis and liver cancer we believe that this study will be very useful in preventing and treating diverse liver diseases '' prof josé luis quiles '' virgin olive oil is the healthiest option '' he adds `` which has already been proven in relation to diverse aspects of health '' these findings may come as a surprise fish oil is the most commonly used natural product in the us due to its frequently documented health benefits still this latest study certainly provides some food for thought when it comes to choosing which fats to include in the dietpopular belief has it and even some governmental authorities on nutrition agree that we should avoid fullfat dairy products due to their high content of saturated fats but a new study boldly challenges these claims fullfat dairy products may actually be good for cardiovascular health wholefat dairy does not raise cardiovascular risk conversely some fats present in certain dairy products might even keep stroke and heart disease at bay this is the main takeaway of a recent study led by dr dariush mozaffarian from the friedman school of nutrition science and policy at tufts university in boston ma with their findings dr mozaffarian and team challenge not only popular opinions but also the stance of governmental organizations such as the united states department of agriculture usda and the us department of health human services the two bodies advise people to avoid fullfat dairy due to its impact on cholesterol levels the saturated fats found in wholefat dairy products warn the usda raise levels of lowdensity lipoprotein ldl cholesterol also known as the `` bad '' kind of cholesterol in time high ldl cholesterol may lead to cardiovascular conditions such as atherosclerosis or coronary artery disease however the new study turns the idea that fullfat dairy is bad for you on its head the surprising findings were published in the american journal of clinical nutrition marcia otto who is an assistant professor in the department of epidemiology human genetics and environmental sciences at the university of texas health science center at houston is the first and corresponding author of the paper dairy fat may prevent heart disease stroke to study the effect of dairy on mortality risk and cardiovascular health dr mozaffarian and team examined over 2900 us seniors aged 65 and above the researchers measured the participants blood plasma levels of three fatty acids contained by dairy products at the beginning of the study in 1992 6 years later and then 13 years later associations with `` total mortality causespecific mortality and cardiovascular disease cvd risk '' were examined these four foods are proven to lower your cholesterol the `` portfolio diet '' has been proved to keep the heart healthy by several studies read now during the 22year followup period 2428 of the participants died of these deaths 833 were due to heart disease however none of the three fatty acids examined correlated with the risk of total mortality in fact high circulating levels of heptadecanoic fatty acid were associated with a lower risk of death from heart disease also adults with higher levels of fatty acids overall were 42 percent less likely to die from stroke revealed the analysis dietary guidelines should be revised according to the studys corresponding author the findings suggest that current dietary guidelines need to be amended the 2015–2020 dietary guidelines for americans issued by the office of disease prevention and health promotion recommend the consumption of `` fatfree and lowfat 1 percent dairy including milk yogurt cheese or fortified soy beverages commonly known as soymilk '' however otto disagrees `` consistent with previous findings '' she says `` our results highlight the need to revisit current dietary guidance on whole fat dairy foods which are rich sources of nutrients such as calcium and potassium '' '' these are essential for health not only during childhood but throughout life particularly also in later years when undernourishment and conditions like osteoporosis are more common '' adds the researcher '' dairy fat contrary to popular belief does not increase the risk of heart disease or overall mortality in older adults in addition the results suggest that one fatty acid present in dairy may lower risk of death from cardiovascular disease particularly from stroke '' marcia otto she adds `` consumers have been exposed to so much different and conflicting information about diet particularly in relation to fats '' and she highlights the fact that `` a growing body of evidence '' suggests that dairy fat is actually good for you '' its important to have robust studies so people can make more balanced and informed choices based on scientific fact rather than hearsay '' otto concludesa new study looking at blood stem cells uncovered fresh details surrounding the mechanisms by which alcohol raises the risk of developing cancer a new study unearths the details of cancers relationship with alcohol alcohol is known to raise the risk of no fewer than seven types of cancer these are mouth upper throat pharynx voice box laryngeal esophageal breast liver and bowel cancer though the links are established exactly how alcohol works to induce malignancy is not as wellunderstood several mechanisms are thought to be at work most previous studies have only examined cells in the laboratory looking at changes in them after exposure to alcohol ethanol recently researchers from mrc laboratory of molecular biology in cambridge united kingdom set out to gain a clearer picture of the alcoholcancer relationship using whole animals their study which was funded by cancer research uk is published this week in the journal nature acetaldehyde and blood stem cells the team fed diluted ethanol to mice and then used chromosome analysis and dna sequencing to measure any damage caused by acetaldehyde a chemical produced when alcohol is processed they focused their attention on a specific cell type blood stem cells blood stem cells found in blood and bone marrow are immature blood cells that can develop into any type of blood cell including white blood cells platelets and red blood cells it is important to understand how alcohol damages these cells as faulty stem cells are known to cause cancer as alcohol is broken down in the gut bacteria convert it into large quantities of acetaldehyde a chemical that has previously been shown to cause cancer in animals even light drinkers at risk of cancer a recent statement from the american society of clinical oncology outlines the dangers of alcohol read now following the analysis the researchers found that acetaldehyde could in fact damage and break dna within blood stem cells chromosomes became rearranged and the dna sequence was permanently changed in stem cells lead study author prof ketan patel says `` some cancers develop due to dna damage in stem cells while some damage occurs by chance our findings suggest that drinking alcohol can increase the risk of this damage '' selfdefense mechanisms alongside new insights into the damage that ethanol causes to stem cells the scientists uncovered new information about the protective mechanisms employed by our bodies in response to alcohol enzymes called aldehyde dehydrogenases aldhs form the first line of defense against alcoholrelated damage aldhs break alcohol down into acetate `` which our cells can use as a source of energy '' millions of people many east asians for instance have low levels of aldh or faulty copies of the enzymes this means that toxic acetaldehyde builds up in the body these individuals will experience telltale flushed cheeks and potentially feel ill when the researchers investigated mice without aldh they found that alcohol caused four times as much damage to dna when compared with mice that could produce aldh beyond aldh the body has a range of other secondary mechanisms that can repair various types of dna damage but these mechanisms do not always work some people have mutations that render them ineffective '' our study highlights that not being able to process alcohol effectively can lead to an even higher risk of alcoholrelated dna damage and therefore certain cancers '' prof ketan patel '' but '' he continues `` its important to remember that alcohol clearance and dna repair systems are not perfect and alcohol can still cause cancer in different ways even in people whose defense mechanisms are intact '' alcohol is known to give rise to cancer and studies such as this help us to understand why and will eventually help to prevent or slow alcoholrelated cancers as prof linda bauld from cancer research uk says `` this thoughtprovoking research highlights the damage alcohol can do to our cells costing some people more than just a hangover ''it was previously believed that fructose which is the sugar found in fruit and fruit juice is processed by the liver however a new study suggests that fructose is mainly processed in the small intestine researchers reveal that fructose is primarily processed in the small intestine not the liver the study which is published in the journal cell metabolism reveals that processed highsugar food and drink only spills over into the liver for processing when the small intestine becomes overwhelmed the recent findings add to the body of scientific knowledge on the effects of too much fructose on the body we know from previous research that excessive consumption of sugar is harmful to the liver and that chronic overconsumption causes obesity increases resistance to insulin and creates conditions for the onset of diabetes last year medical news today reported on a study that found that fructosecontaining products such as sweetened drinks can increase the risk of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis a form of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease `` which can lead to cirrhosis or liver cancer '' study observed fructose digestion in mice the researchers from princeton university in new jersey used mice to study how fructose travels through the digestive system their findings suggest that there is a physiological difference in how the body processes different amounts of sugar rather than the liver processing all the sugar in the body the team observed that more than 90 percent of fructose was processed in the small intestines of the mice in the study the team found that fructose not absorbed into the small intestine is passed through to the colon where it comes into contact with the microbiome which is the microbiotic flora that inhabits the large intestine and colon fruit juices and smoothies have unacceptably high sugar content researchers reveal that a childs entire daily sugar allowance could be in one serving of fruit juice read now the researchers explain that the microbiome is not designed to process sugar so while a person could eat a large amount of carbohydrates without exposing their microbiome to any sugar this changes significantly when highsugar products such as soda and juice are consumed while the findings do not prove that fructose influences the microbiome the team believes that `` an effect is likely '' they suggest that this link should be further investigated in future studies as it may provide new insights into the adverse effects of high sugar intake eat sugar only after meals in the study the small intestine was found to clear fructose more efficiently after a meal the team theorizes that during periods of fasting such as in the morning or midafternoon individuals may be more vulnerable to fructose as the small intestine has reduced ability to process it during these times as study author joshua d rabinowitz of the lewissigler institute for integrative genomics at princeton university explains `` we can offer some reassurance at least from these animal studies that fructose from moderate amounts of fruits will not reach the liver '' '' we saw that feeding of the mice prior to the sugar exposure enhanced the small intestines ability to process fructose '' rabinowitz continues `` and that protected the liver and the microbiome from sugar exposure '' rabinowitz says that the results support `` the most oldfashioned advice in the world '' which is to `` limit sweets to moderate quantities after meals '' and avoid sugary drinks outside of meal timesit is known that being overweight or obese leads to poor health but it may be less known that abdominal fat is the most harmful type until now researchers were unsure of the mechanisms responsible for this but now they reveal how an enzyme produced by our liver raises the risk of diabetes inflammation in the fat around the belly is particularly harmful and new research reveals why when it comes to the harmful consequences of excess fat the way it is distributed across the body is key medical news today have recently reported on studies showing that abdominal fat is deeply tied to type 2 diabetes and heart disease we have also covered studies suggesting that women in particular could be at an increased cardiometabolic risk if they have a higher waisttohip ratio additional research has found that belly fat is particularly dangerous when inflamed older studies have shown that local inflammation in the adipose tissue leads to cardiometabolic abnormalities such as insulin resistance but the exact mechanism responsible for this connection between adipose tissue inflammation and cardiometabolic disorders has remained somewhat unclear for instance researchers have wondered whether the inflammation is `` a cause or a consequence of insulin resistance '' now researchers at columbia university irving medical center in new york city ny help to shed some muchneeded light on the issue they reveal that the liver contributes to this inflammation the team was led by dr ira tabas who is the richard j stock professor of medicine at columbia university vagelos college of physicians and surgeons and the findings were published in the journal nature the key role of dpp4 inhibitors in diabetes dr tabas and his colleagues used obese mice to test whether blocking an enzyme called dpp4 would lower the inflammation in their abdominal fat the researchers focused on dpp4 because humans who already have diabetes are prescribed dpp4 inhibitors to help them manage their symptoms dpp4 inhibitors work by preventing the enzyme from interacting with an insulinboosting hormone lowcalorie sweeteners may promote metabolic syndrome people with metabolic syndrome are much more likely to develop diabetes to prevent it new research suggests that these people should avoid artificial sweeteners read now in this study dpp4 did not lower abdominal inflammation in mice dr tabas explains these findings suggesting that they may be down to the difference between how dpp4 inhibitors work in the gut versus how they work in the liver '' dpp4 inhibitors lower blood sugar by inhibiting dpp4 in the gut but we have some evidence that dpp4 inhibitors in the gut also end up promoting inflammation in fat '' he states `` that cancels out the antiinflammatory effects the drugs may have when they reach inflammatory cells called macrophages in the fat '' '' from our studies '' adds dr tabas `` we know that dpp4 interacts with a molecule on these cells to increase inflammation if we could block that interaction we might be able stop the enzyme from causing inflammation and insulin resistance '' so the researchers targeted dpp4 in the liver cells instead of the gut this reduced adipose inflammation and lowered insulin resistance dpp4 inhibitors also decreased blood sugar toward human clinical trials as dr tabas reports `` inhibiting dpp4 specifically in liver cells attacks insulin resistance the core problem of type 2 diabetes at least in our preclinical models '' the researchers explain what the findings mean for future treatments of type 2 diabetes dr tabas says `` if we can develop ways to target liver dpp4 in people this may be a powerful new way to treat obesityinduced type 2 diabetes '' dr ahmed a hasan a medical officer and program director in the atherothrombosis coronary artery disease branch of the national heart lung and blood institute also comments on the findings he says `` this study reveals a potential new target for the treatment of type 2 diabetes and cardiometabolic disorders '' '' these findings may pave the way for a future clinical trial to test whether a new treatment approach based on this target could improve insulin resistance in diabetic patients more research is needed '' dr ahmed a hasanby finding a link to a condition that raises the risk of type 2 diabetes new research questions the health benefits of ketogenic diets is there a link between diabetes and the keto diet ketogenic diets are lowcarbohydrate highfat diets that have been shown to reduce weight they change metabolism so that energy comes from fat instead of sugar when researchers in switzlerland examined what happened to mice in the early stages of a ketogenic diet they found that the animals showed a poorer ability to regulate blood sugar compared with similar mice on a highfat highcarbohydrate diet in a paper on their work now published in the journal of physiology they note that `` even though keto dietfed animals appear healthy in the fasted state they exhibit decreased glucose tolerance to a greater extent than highfat dietfed animals '' the reason for this they found was that the livers of the keto dietfed mice were not responding as well to insulin this condition which is known as insulin resistance raises the risk of developing type 2 diabetes '' diabetes is one of the biggest health issues we face '' says study author christian wolfrum who is with the institute of food nutrition and health at eth zürich in switzerland insulin resistance insulin is a hormone that helps the body control levels of blood sugar or glucose if blood sugar stays above normal for long periods of time it becomes a condition called hyperglycemia that can lead to serious health problems this is the hallmark of diabetes in type 1 diabetes hyperglycemia develops because the pancreas does not make enough insulin in type 2 diabetes organs and tissues lose their ability to respond to insulin the pancreas tries to compensate by making more insulin but eventually this is not enough and leads to hyperglycemia normal blood sugar levels may not be so normal after all researchers have found that `` normal '' levels of blood glucose often mask spikes that are considerably higher than what is considered healthy read now there are a number of ways in which insulin helps control blood glucose levels one is by signaling to the liver to reduce glucose production and another is by helping muscles and tissues absorb glucose and convert it into energy insulin resistance is a `` complex metabolic disorder '' with no obvious single cause the liver becomes insulin resistant when it fails to reduce glucose production in response to insulin cells can also become insulin resistant when they need increasing amounts of the hormone to help them use glucose however the researchers found that the main reason for decreased glucose tolerance in the keto dietfed mice was due to insulin resistance in the liver `` rather than impaired glucose clearance and tissue glucose uptake '' despite extensive research into the causes of insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes they are not completely understood one thing that scientists do know is that fatlike substances called lipids are `` clearly associated with insulin resistance '' even here however many questions remain such as `` is the link due to circulating fats or to fat buildup in tissue '' ketogenic diets and ketosis by dramatically reducing intake of carbohydrates keto diets induce a metabolic state known as ketosis in this state cells that would normally get their energy from glucose switch to ketones the lack of carbohydrates makes the body break down fats into fatty acids and then into ketones keto diets are probably among the `` most studied '' approaches to weight loss of recent times a lot of research now backs the idea that keto diets have a sound `` physiological and biochemical basis '' and can significantly benefit cardiovascular health this is welcome news to many physicians for whom one of the biggest challenges that they face in their daily practices is treating obesity however while keto diets have a proven track record in tackling obesity some concerns remain many of these likely relate to a `` broad lack of knowledge about the physiological mechanisms involved '' mechanisms of insulin resistance not clear the new study helps plug some of this knowledge gap it suggests that insulin resistance in the liver can develop in the early stages of keto diets this now needs to be confirmed in humans also the underlying mechanisms that lead to insulin resistance are still unclear especially in relation to different diets this also needs to be explored further say the researchers another area that needs further research is the effect on the brain of the byproducts of fatty acid breakdown the researchers theory is that the fatty acid byproducts might have important `` signaling roles '' in the brain '' although ketogenic diets are known to be healthy our findings indicate that there may be an increased risk of insulin resistance with this type of diet that may lead to type 2 diabetes '' christian wolfrumby probing the effect that vitamin d3 has on the cells that make up the lining of blood vessels scientists at ohio university in athens oh have identified for the first time the role that the `` sunshine vitamin '' plays in preserving cardiovascular health the sunshine vitamin has been shown to preserve heart health in a paper published in the international journal of nanomedicine they describe how they used nanosensors and a cell model to identify the molecular mechanisms that vitamin d3 can trigger in the endothelium which is the thin layer of tissue that lines blood vessels it was previously believed that the endothelium served no other purpose than to act as an inert `` wrapper '' of the vascular system allowing both water and electrolytes to pass in and out of the bloodstream however advances over the past 30 years have revealed that the endothelium acts more like an organ that lines the whole of the circulatory system from the `` heart to the smallest capillaries '' and whose cells carry out many unique biological functions changes to the endothelium have been linked to several serious health problems including high blood pressure insulin resistance diabetes tumor growth virus infections and atherosclerosis which is a condition wherein fatty deposits can build up inside arteries and increase the risk of heart attack and stroke vitamin d3 has role beyond bone health the new study suggests that vitamin d3 a version of vitamin d that our bodies produce naturally when we expose our skin to the sun plays a key role in preserving and restoring the damage to the endothelium that occurs in these diseases some other natural sources of vitamin d3 include egg yolks and oily fish it is also obtainable in the form of supplements vitamin d3 is already wellknown for its role in bone health '' however '' explains senior author tadeusz malinski a professor in the department of chemistry and biochemistry `` in recent years in clinical settings people recognize that many patients who have a heart attack will have a deficiency of d3 '' '' it doesnt mean that the deficiency caused the heart attack '' he adds `` but it increased the risk of heart attack '' nanosensors probed effect of d3 on cells for their study prof malinski and colleagues developed a measuring system using nanosensors or tiny probes that are 1000 times smaller than the thickness of human hair and can operate at the level of atoms and molecules they used the nanosensors to track the impact of vitamin d3 on molecular mechanisms in human endothelial cells that had been treated to show the same type of damage that occurs from high blood pressure blood vessel discovery may prevent diabetes a new microscopy technique reveals that the transport of insulin across the endothelium differs to that suggested previously read now the findings suggest that vitamin d3 is a powerful trigger of nitric oxide which is a molecule that plays an important signaling role in the control of blood flow and the formation of blood clots in blood vessels the researchers also found that vitamin d3 significantly reduces oxidative stress in the vascular system they note that their study `` provides direct molecular insight to previously published observations that have suggested that vitamin d3 deficiencyinduced hypertension is associated with vascular oxidative stress '' the effects of vitamin d3 were similar in both caucasian and african american endothelial cells could d3 reverse cardiovascular damage the study authors note that while their findings came from tests performed on a cellular model of high blood pressure `` the implications of the influence of vitamin d3 on dysfunctional endothelium is much broader '' they suggest that vitamin d3 has the potential to significantly reverse the damage that high blood pressure diabetes atherosclerosis and other diseases inflict on the cardiovascular system '' there are not many '' prof malinski adds `` if any known systems which can be used to restore cardiovascular endothelial cells which are already damaged and vitamin d3 can do it '' '' this is a very inexpensive solution to repair the cardiovascular system we dont have to develop a new drug we already have it '' prof tadeusz malinskisome people find it harder to lose weight than others but why is this a new study has identified a molecule in fat cells that could be to blame researchers have uncovered one reason why some people may find it hard to lose weight researchers found that the fat cells of people who are obese show higher expression of a molecule called lysyl oxidase lox lox is associated with fibrosis or `` scarring '' of fat tissue which as previous research has shown can hamper weight loss efforts study coauthor dr katarina kos who works in the diabetes and obesity research group at the university of exeter medical school in the united kingdom and colleagues recently reported their findings in the journal metabolism it is thought that around 1 in 3 adults in the united states are obese which puts them at increased risk of type 2 diabetes stroke heart disease and some forms of cancer a lack of exercise and a poor diet are the primary causes of obesity so its no surprise that eating a healthful diet and increasing physical activity are the first strategies we try in an attempt to shed the pounds but these interventions can produce mixed results some individuals see the pounds fall off while others find it much more challenging the new study may have uncovered one explanation for the latter higher lox levels in people who are obese for their study dr kos and colleagues analyzed samples of abdominal fat tissue that had been taken from obese individuals before they underwent weight loss surgery compared with abdominal fat tissue samples of leaner subjects the analysis revealed that the fat tissue of obese people had greater expression of the lox molecule which is a cause of fat tissue fibrosis on further investigation the researchers found that the increase in lox expression was driven by an increase in oxygen deprivation and inflammation in fat cells which occurs when fat cells become larger weight loss breakthrough sunlight is key researchers suggest that lack of sunlight may be to blame for winter weight gain read now the scientists explain that when fat cells undergo this type of stress they lose their ability to store excess calories as a result these calories become stored as fat around important organs such as the liver and heart and this is associated with numerous health problems including heart disease and type 2 diabetes unfortunately studies have shown that fat tissue fibrosis can make it harder for individuals to lose weight `` but this does not mean that scarring makes weight loss impossible '' dr kos emphasizes '' adding some regular activity to a somewhat reduced energy intake for a longer period makes weight loss possible and helps the fat tissue not to become further overworked '' she continues `` we know that doing this improves our blood sugar and is key in the management of diabetes '' we need to look after our fat what is more the teams findings indicate that targeting the lox molecule could be one way to prevent fat cell fibrosis and possibly make weight loss easier but more studies are needed to confirm this theory dr kos notes that further research is also needed in order to identify other ways to prevent fat tissue fibrosis in the meantime she says that increasing our physical activity could help '' there is evidence that once fat tissue becomes scarred despite weight loss it may not recover fully '' she says `` we need to look after our fat tissue which can cease to cope if it is overworked when being forced to absorb more and more calories '' '' as a clinician '' dr kos concludes `` i would advise exercise or at least a walk after a meal which can make a great difference to our metabolic health ''its likely that we all enjoy a hot cup of tea or herbal infusion at least from time to time if not on a daily basis but what are the most important health benefits that some of these soothing teas can bring us read on to learn more about the top teas for our health some teas and herbal infusions have long been appreciated for their alleged health benefits but what does research have to say '' tea began as a medicine and grew into a beverage '' writes 19thcentury japanese scholar okakura kakuzo in his infamous publication the book of tea in it he speaks at length about the history of tea and the philosophy of the traditional japanese tea ceremony kakuzo was correct modern research about the history of teadrinking in the world confirms that this beverage was originally consumed less for pleasure or as a mindfulness aid calling for the drinker to take slow sips and be in the moment instead as shown by prof victor henry mair from the university of pennsylvania in philadelphia in the true history of tea early in its history the tea plant camellia sinensis became popular for its medicinal properties the tea plants main varieties camellia sinensis sinensis and camellia sinensis assamica are responsible for most of the tea brews that we are accustomed to black tea green tea white tea and oolong tea there are many other types of teas and infusions using various other plants such as aspalathus linearis which is better known as `` rooibos '' or `` redbush '' in this spotlight well give you an overview of the top five teas that can benefit your health 1 green tea a favorite with tea drinkers everywhere green tea has been praised for its medicinal properties for years some recent studies have now confirmed some of these benefits suggesting that green tea may protect various aspects of our health green tea can increase cognitive functioning to begin with this beverage has been found to enhance cognitive functioning with one study connecting it to better working memory the type of we use on a daytoday basis researchers from the university hospital of basel in switzerland found that healthy people who agreed to consume a soft drink containing 275 grams of green tea extract exhibited more intense activity in brain areas linked to working memory therefore participants who had ingested the green tea extract had better connectivity between the frontal and parietal lobes of the brain which are two regions involved in aspects of learning memory processes and decisionmaking the health benefits brought about by green tea have been linked with their content of polyphenols which are micronutrients with antioxidant properties as antioxidants these substances can protect against the action of free radicals which induce the type of cellular damage consistent with aging a 2017 study that was published in the journal of the american chemical society found that one such polyphenol found in green tea called epigallocatechin gallate may lower the risk of alzheimers disease by interacting with the `` building blocks '' that form betaamyloid plaques a buildup of these plaques in the brain is typical of this condition and impairs brain cell signaling epigallocatechin gallate this study suggests could stop betaamyloid from forming into plaques potentially helping to keep alzheimers at bay this same green tea polyphenol has also been said to slow down the growth of tumor cells of certain types of cancer such as pancreatic cancer research that was led by the los angeles biomedical research institute in california has shown that epigallocatechin gallate can disrupt the metabolism of pancreatic cancer cells thereby impairing their growth 2 jasmine tea what we refer to as `` jasmine tea '' is a type of beverage that usually has green tea at its base to which jasmine flowers are added for an enriched aroma jasmine tea is an important component of the diet of one of the longestliving populations in the world but the benefits of jasmine tea arent solely due to the antioxidant effects of the tea plant since jasmine blooms also bring their own medicinal properties to the mix in the book ikigai the japanese secret to a long and happy life authors héctor garcía and francesc miralles note that the inhabitants of a healthy longlived community in the okinawa prefecture of japan are avid drinkers of sanpincha a special blend of green tea and jasmine '' okinawans drink more sanpincha a mix of green tea and jasmine flowers than any other kind of tea '' they write suggesting that this blend may play a role in keeping the inhabitants of okinawa healthy and mentally agile well into old age this may be because like the tea plant jasmine flowers contain antioxidants which may protect cells from agerelated damage what are the best foods to fight aging read about the top five foods that will help you to stay young in body and mind read now jasmine itself has been linked with improved physical wellbeing and is said to reduce the impact of stress that is why some researchers have experimented with compounds derived from this plant in the search of better therapies for instance prof eliezer flescher from tel aviv university in israel noticed that methyl jasmonate which is a compound obtained from jasmonic acid found in the jasmine plant induces the death of cervical cancer cells and if you happen to enjoy drinking jasmine tea simply because you love the way it smells theres actually a good reason for that research that was published in the european journal of applied physiology explained that the smell of jasmine tea is soothing able to calm nerves and able to help regulate mood 3 rooibos tea another type of tea with antioxidant properties is rooibos or `` redbush tea '' which is prepared from the aspalathus linearis plant native to south africa rooibos tea may protect liver health research has suggested that the antioxidant effects of rooibos are similar to if not quite as strong as those of green tea a recent study on the rat model has suggested that the antioxidants in rooibos tea may protect the liver from oxidative stress helping to render this organ more resilient to induced damage the researchers who conducted the study noted that their findings suggest that rooibos tea or rooibosderived dietary supplements may offer a useful health boost '' results from this study suggest that the daily intake of unfermented rooibos herbal tea or a derived commercial rooibos supplement may benefit human health by providing the liver with an enhanced antioxidant capacity to reduce damage induced by toxicants '' moreover rooibos has also been cited as helpful in lowering blood pressure and relaxing tense muscles suggesting that the active ingredient in this instance might be one of the flavonoids pigments that it contains chrysoeriol unlike green or black tea rooibos does not contain any caffeine so it wont have the same stimulating effects this makes it safe to drink well into the evening 4 hibiscus tea those of you who enjoy the refreshing taste of a more sour brew may also be familiar with herbal infusions of hibiscus a plant whose flowers can be used not just to make invigorating beverages but also to give a subtle `` punch '' to salads or as an elegant garnish for sophisticated dishes hibiscus tea is an antioxidant and may bring cardiovascular benefits the most commonly used variety is hibiscus sabdariffa also known as the `` roselle '' for the tea or more correctly `` tisane '' herbal tea its calyces are typically used although other parts of the plant such as the leaves seeds and roots are safe for consumption studies have suggested that extracts from the hibiscus calyx and hibiscus leaves have antioxidant and antitumoral effects therefore they may protect against the aging action of free radicals at a cellular level as well as fight certain types of leukemia cells hibiscus tea has also been tied to cardiovascular benefits helping to regulate systolic and diastolic blood pressure that is blood pressure during and inbetween heart beats respectively though not so commonly used to brew tea hibiscus leaves have also been linked repeatedly to a wide array of health benefits thus the polyphenols in hibiscus leaves may help to induce tumor cell death in skin cancer according to a 2015 study another study from the same year also argued that hibiscus leaf extracts could inhibit the action of prostate cancer cells 5 lemon verbena tea another herbal tea whose medicinal properties are getting increasingly recognized is that made out of lemon verbena scientifically dubbed aloysia citrodora infusions with lemon verbena are said to help with weight management it is the citrusflavored cousin of a betterknown plant that has been used in herbal infusions for years verbena or vervain verbena officinalis infusions made with lemon verbena are great for those who like me prefer a subtler citrusy aroma in their hot drinks rather than the strong lemony flavor of commonly commercialized citrus tea blends the first time that i came upon this plant sold as a tisane herb was in a local organic shop that was selling it as `` weight loss tea '' in fact studies have shown that the polyphenols in this plant can decrease the formation of fatty acids marking its potential use in the treatment of obesityrelated health issues researchers have also suggested that lemon verbena extracts may help to lower inflammatory markers levels in the blood of some people with multiple sclerosis '' results demonstrate that supplementation with lemon verbena extracts may affect the cytokine inflammation markers profile depending on the clinical subtype '' the study authors conclude having a cup of your tea or tisane of choice may be a pleasant way to carve out some selfindulgence time and stimulate your bodily and mental wellbeing in a subtle way but always keep in mind that as the saying goes `` one swallow does not a summer make '' and the most potent health benefits are best reaped by leading a healthful wholesome lifestyle we picked linked items based on the quality of products and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you we partner with some of the companies that sell these products which means healthline uk and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a links aboveheart disease is still the number one killer in the united states in this spotlight we outline 16 foods that when consumed as part of a wellrounded diet might help to keep your heart healthy how can you improve your heart health with food there are many things you can do to help keep your heart healthy and diseasefree you can schedule an annual checkup exercise daily quit smoking or take steps to reduce the level of stress in your life all of these things can have a positive effect on heart health but one of the simplest lifestyle changes that will benefit your heart is watching what you eat nearly 6 million people are currently living with heart failure and around half of these will die within 5 years of being diagnosed the centers for disease control and prevention cdc warn that eating foods high in fat cholesterol or sodium can be very bad for the heart so when taking steps to minimize the risk of heart disease diet is a good place to start in this article we examine some of the best foods for ensuring that you keep a robust and healthy heart 1 asparagus asparagus is a natural source of folate which helps to prevent an amino acid called homocysteine from building up in the body high homocysteine levels have been linked with an increased risk of heartrelated conditions such as coronary artery disease and stroke 2 beans peas chickpeas and lentils beans peas chickpeas and lentils otherwise known as pulses or legumes can all significantly reduce levels of lowdensity lipoprotein ldl or `` bad cholesterol '' they are also packed with fiber protein and antioxidant polyphenols all of which have beneficial effects on the heart and general health 3 berries berries are also full of antioxidant polyphenols which help to reduce heart disease risk berries are a great source of fiber folate iron calcium vitamin a and vitamin c and they are low in fat 4 broccoli some studies suggest that regularly eating steamed broccoli can lower cholesterol levels and prevent heart disease 5 chia seeds and flaxseeds these seeds are a rich plantbased source of omega3 fatty acids such as alphalinolenic acid omega3s have many beneficial effects such as helping to lower levels of triglycerides ldl and total cholesterol they also reduce blood pressure and minimize the buildup of fatty plaques in the arteries omega3s decrease the risk of disorders that can lead to heart attack such as thrombosis and arrhythmias 6 dark chocolate dark chocolate is a rare example of a food that tastes amazing and is good for you in moderation dark chocolate delicious and hearthealthy scientists now believe that dark chocolate has protective benefits against atherosclerosis which is when plaque builds up inside the arteries increasing risk of heart attack and stroke dark chocolate seems to prevent two of the mechanisms implicated in atherosclerosis stiffness of the arteries and white blood cell adhesion which is when white blood cells stick to the walls of blood vessels what is more studies have found that increasing dark chocolates flavanol content which is the compound that makes it tasty and moreish does not diminish these protective benefits 7 coffee also in the `` almost too good to be true '' camp is coffee one recent study found that regularly drinking coffee was linked with a decreased risk of developing heart failure and stroke however it is important to bear in mind that this study which used machine learning to assess data from the framingham heart study can only observe an association between factors and can not conclusively identify cause and effect could coffee stop clogged arteries consuming more than three cups of coffee every day may lower the risk of atherosclerosis read now 8 fish high in omega3s fish is a strong source of hearthelping omega3 fatty acids and protein but it is low in saturated fat people who have heart disease or are at risk of developing it are often recommended to increase their intake of omega3s by eating fish this is because they lower the risk of abnormal heartbeats and slow the growth of plaque in the arteries according to the american heart association aha we should eat a 35ounce serving of fatty fish such as salmon mackerel herring lake trout sardines or albacore tuna at least twice per week 9 green tea a 2011 systematic review found that drinking green tea is associated with a small reduction in cholesterol which as we know is a main contributor to heart disease and stroke but the review could not pinpoint how much green tea someone would have to drink to receive any health benefits in 2014 another review studied the effects of drinking green tea on people with high blood pressure the report concluded that green tea was associated with a reduction in blood pressure but the authors were unable to determine if this modest reduction could help to prevent heart disease 10 nuts almonds hazelnuts peanuts pecans pistachios and walnuts are all hearthealthy nut options these nuts are full of protein fiber minerals vitamins and antioxidants like fish and flaxseeds walnuts are also ripe with omega3 fatty acids making them a hearthealthy snack to have on the go 11 liver of all the organ meats liver is the most nutrientdense in particular liver is bulging with folic acid iron chromium copper and zinc which increase the bloods hemoglobin level and help to keep our heart healthy 12 oatmeal because oatmeal is rich in soluble fiber it may help to reduce the risk of heart disease a 2008 review of the evidence concluded that oatbased products significantly reduce ldl and total cholesterol without any adverse effects 13 red wine sort of many studies have noted the potential health benefits of the antioxidants in red wine however it is unlikely that the benefits of the antioxidants outweigh the dangers of alcohol red wine contains beneficial antioxidants but bear in mind that it should only be consumed in moderation recently however a new study proposed that these same antioxidants could form the basis of a new stent for use during angioplasty the process where narrow or obstructed veins are widened to treat atherosclerosis the researchers behind that study are currently developing a new kind of stent that releases red winelike antioxidants into the blood to promote healing prevent blood clotting and reduce inflammation during angioplasty it is worth noting that drinking alcohol in general is not healthy for your heart in fact it is vitally important for cardiovascular health to drink alcohol in moderation if at all 14 spinach you can help to maintain a healthy heart rhythm by regularly consuming good sources of magnesium spinach is one of the best sources of dietary magnesium and consumption of popeyes favorite food is associated with a raft of health benefits 15 tomatoes tomatoes have lots of nutrients that might help keep our hearts healthy the little red fruits are chockfull of fiber potassium vitamin c folate and choline which are all good for the heart as well as helping to keep heart disease at bay potassium benefits muscles and bones and helps prevent kidney stones from forming scientists have argued that increasing potassium intake while decreasing sodium intake is the most important dietary change when attempting to reduce the risk of heart disease 16 vegetables the aha advise that we eat eight or more servings of fruit and vegetables each day vegetables are low in fat and calories but rich in fiber minerals and vitamins a healthful amount of veggies in the diet can help to moderate weight and blood pressureinsights from a new study by the university of cambridge in the united kingdom about the role of calcium in brain cells signaling mechanisms brings us closer to understanding the causes of parkinsons disease having excess calcium in the brain may be a reason for why parkinsons disease develops the presence of toxic protein deposits or lewy bodies inside brain cells is a recognized hallmark of parkinsons disease the deposits contain clusters of alphasynuclein and other proteins that have folded into the wrong shape the new study now published in the journal nature communications shows that calcium affects the way in which alphasynuclein binds to synaptic vesicles synaptic vesicles are small compartments in nerve terminals that hold the neurotransmitters or chemical messengers that carry signals between brain cells '' there is a fine balance '' notes cofirst author dr amberley stephens a postdoctoral researcher in molecular neuroscience at the university of cambridge `` of calcium and alphasynuclein in the cell and when there is too much of one or the other the balance is tipped and aggregation begins leading to parkinsons disease '' normal vs abnormal alphasynuclein worldwide there are more than 10 million people living with parkinsons disease including around 1 million in the united states in parkinsons disease there is a progressive destruction of brain cells that produce a neurotransmitter called dopamine which is important for controlling movement therefore as the disease progresses there will be a worsening of symptoms such as slowness of movement rigidity tremor and impaired coordination and balance could an existing drug halt parkinsons disease learn how a drug for a rare genetic disorder may be effective against toxic alphasynuclein clusters in brain cells read now more recent studies have revealed that parkinsons also affects brain cells that do not produce dopamine which might explain why some of the symptoms are not movementrelated although abnormal clusters of alphasynuclein a small protein comprising only 140 amino acids is a major element of the lewy bodies that are present in parkinsons disease its normal form appears to be necessary for a number of brain cell functions however apart from knowing that the protein somehow interacts with synaptic vesicles to ensure the smooth transport of molecules across the synapse or the gap between the nerve terminal and the next cell we know little about the underlying mechanism alphasynuclein acts like a calcium sensor '' alphasynuclein '' notes senior study author dr gabriele kaminski schierle of the department of chemical engineering and biotechnology at the university of cambridge `` is a very small protein with very little structure and it needs to interact with other proteins or structures in order to become functional which has made it difficult to study '' advances in microscope technology mean that researchers can now observe what happens inside cells dr kaminski schierle and colleagues used `` superresolution microscopy '' and `` isolated synaptic vesicles '' to examine the detailed behavior of alphasynuclein they found that when the level of calcium rises in the cell alphasynuclein binds to vesicles at more than one point which causes the vesicles to cluster '' we think '' explains cofirst author dr janin lautenschläger also of the department of chemical engineering and biotechnology `` that alphasynuclein is almost like a calcium sensor '' '' in the presence of calcium '' she continues `` it changes its structure and how it interacts with its environment which is likely very important for its normal function '' a delicate balance the authors propose that the abnormal clusters of alphasynuclein form when the delicate balance between the protein and calcium is upset they suggest a number of things that might cause such an imbalance such as agerelated slowing of the elimination of excess protein doubling of alphasynuclein production due to gene duplication higher calcium levels in brain cells vulnerable to parkinsons inability to buffer calcium effectively in parkinsonssensitive cells a more detailed understanding of how alphasynuclein behaves in both health and disease should lead to muchneeded new drugs for parkinsons disease the authors conclude they also note that a drug that blocks the calcium channel in heart disease might `` prove to be a valuable candidate to act against parkinsons disease via lowering intracellular calcium load '' '' this is the first time weve seen that calcium influences the way alphasynuclein interacts with synaptic vesicles '' dr janin lautenschlägertwo new studies confirm the hypothesis that the psychoactive compound found in `` magic mushrooms '' may be a useful new treatment for depression avoiding some of the side effects of conventional antidepressants magic mushrooms or shrooms may hold surprising benefits for our mental health at medical news today we have reported on a range of studies that pointed to psilocybin the psychoactive substance in `` magic mushrooms '' as a potential remedy for depression two such studies showed that the psychoactive compound can reduce feelings of anxiety and depression in people with advanced cancer while another small trial suggested that the compound could succeed where previous depression treatment has failed treating depression can be challenging not only because some depression types are treatmentresistant but also because existing therapies have a range of unwanted side effects one such adverse effect frequently reported by people living with depression is the `` emotional blunting '' indifference or apathy that comes with taking antidepressants a new study which was carried out by researchers at imperial college london icl in the united kingdom suggests that magic mushrooms could treat depression while avoiding these side effects the new research consists of two studies both of which were led by leor roseman a member of the psychedelic research group at icl participants felt emotionally reconnected in the first study published in the journal neuropharmacology 20 people diagnosed with moderate to severe depression that conventional treatment had not alleviated participated in two dosing sessions with the magic mushroom compound using functional mri fmri the team scanned the brains of the participants while they looked at pictures of emotive expressions the scans were taken before and after each drug intervention in order to assess the impact of the treatment on depression the subjects were all provided with psychological support before during and after the intervention after the treatment the participants reported feeling better `` emotionally reconnected and accepting '' the fmri scans also revealed a stronger brain response to emotive faces specifically the scientists saw more activity in the brains amygdala which is an emotionprocessing area associated with depression the study authors explain '' based on the present results we propose that psilocybin with psychological support is a treatment approach that potentially revives emotional responsiveness in depression enabling patients to reconnect with their emotions '' roseman comments on the new findings saying that they `` are important as they reveal biological changes after psilocybin therapy and more specifically they suggest that increased emotional processing is crucial for the treatment to work '' but the authors also caution that more research is needed to establish firmly whether the positive effects were due to the psychoactive compound itself the psychological counseling or the interruption of the antidepressant treatment the subjects had been on before the study '' having a healthy control group in future studies should be helpful in answering some of these questions '' roseman admits mystical experience improves efficacy the second paper published in the journal frontiers in pharmacology examined whether or not the quality of the psychedelic experience was linked with the success of the treatment roseman and colleagues gave questionnaires to another group of 20 volunteers who underwent two treatment sessions with psilocybin what to know about avoiding depression here are seven tips that may help you to avoid a depression relapse read now the researchers looked at the socalled feeling of oceanic boundlessness which is a `` mysticaltype experience '' involving feelings of unity and a lack of boundaries between the self and the universe the study revealed that the more strongly the participants felt this experience the better was their mental health in the longterm depressive symptoms subsided and the mental benefits lasted for weeks after the treatment in participants who reported a strong mystical experience '' future therapeutic work with psychedelics may consider investigating ways which enhance mysticaltype experience and reduce anxiety given the growing evidence that this serves the efficacy of the treatment model '' conclude the authors directions for future research the researchers are planning on carrying out larger trials with a healthy control group in which the effects of psilocybin could be compared with an existing antidepressant '' we also want to investigate how the amygdala responds a longer time after treatment '' roseman adds `` which will inform us about longerterm effects compared to the first study which was only looked at 1 day after the therapy '' additionally in light of the findings of their second study the group recommends that future trials with psychedelics should aim to enhance the `` mystical '' aspect of the experiencehiv therapy involves a combination of drugs that must be taken once or twice daily making treatment adherence challenging for many people but researchers may have found a solution to this problem in the form of a pill that only needs to be taken once per week researchers have developed a pill for hiv that would only need to be taken once weekly researchers from the massachusetts institute of technology mit and brigham and womens hospital both located in boston ma have developed an ingestible capsule that can slowly release 1 weeks worth of antiretroviral drugs the teams novel creation has the potential to transform hiv therapy as it means that people may only need to take a single pill once every week rather than multiple medications every day colead study author robert langer the david h koch institute professor at mit and his colleagues believe that their `` pillbox in a capsule '' could combat the current problem of adherence to antiretroviral therapy research has indicated that up to 30 percent of people with hiv fail to stick to their treatment regimen langer and his colleagues recently reported the details of their new creation in the journal nature communications hiv and antiretroviral therapy hiv is a virus that attacks and destroys immune cells that are important for staving off infection and disease if left untreated hiv can progress to aids wherein a persons immune system is so severely damaged that they become vulnerable to serious illnesses in 2016 there were around 367 million people across the globe living with hiv or aids of these individuals around 18 million were newly infected hiv could new injection work as effectively as daily drugs researchers suggest that a new antiretroviral injection may be just as effective as daily medications for hiv read now just 30 years ago hiv was considered by many as a death sentence today the virus can be successfully managed with antiretroviral drugs which work by reducing the level of hiv in the body a combination of different antiretroviral drugs must be taken every day in order for treatment to be successful but patients can find it hard to stick to such a regimen '' one of the main barriers to treating and preventing hiv is adherence '' notes the studys coauthor giovanni traverso of the mits koch institute for integrative cancer research `` the ability to make doses less frequent stands to improve adherence and make a significant impact at the patient level '' '' these slowrelease dosage systems perform equal or better than the current daily doses for hiv treatment in preclinical models '' he adds building the pillbox in a capsule with this in mind the researchers decided to build on an idea that first emerged in 2016 which was an ingestible capsule that could remain in the stomach for 2 weeks and deliver drugs in a previous study langer and his colleagues demonstrated how the capsule could help to treat malaria by slowly releasing controlled doses of the malaria drug ivermectin for their latest study the team looked at whether the capsule could be effective for the treatment of hiv but some design changes were required the original capsule consisted of six arms made of a single strong polymer each arm was loaded with drugs and folded in after ingestion the arms folded out and released the drugs for the treatment of hiv however the capsule would need to be able to release different drugs at different rates something that the original design did not allow as such the team adapted the design the main structure of the new capsule is still built from a single strong polymer but each of the six arms can hold a different medication thanks to the addition of `` release polymers '' '' in a way its like putting a pillbox in a capsule now you have chambers for every day of the week on a single capsule '' says traverso pill effective in pigs to test whether the newly designed capsule could be effective against hiv the researchers loaded it with three different antiretroviral drugs dolutegravir rilpivirine and cabotegravir that are currently used to both prevent and treat hiv on testing the drugloaded capsule on pigs the researchers found that the capsule successfully settled in the animals stomachs and they gradually released each of the three drugs over a 1week period once all of the drugs are released the capsule disintegrates allowing it to be passed through the gastrointestinal tract of course the capsule needs to be tested in humans before it can be used for the prevention and treatment of hiv but the researchers believe that their study results show promise the researchers calculated the potential impact of this onceaweek capsule at population level and they suggest that the pill could boost preventive treatment efficacy for hiv by 20 percent also approximately 200000–800000 new hiv infections could be prevented in south africa over the next 20 years commenting on the findings anthony fauci director of the national institute of allergy and infectious disease which helped to fund the study says `` a longeracting less invasive oral formulation could be one important part of our future arsenal to stop the hivaids pandemic '' '' new and improved tools for hiv treatment and prevention along with wider implementation of novel and existing approaches are needed to end the hiv pandemic as we know it studies such as this help us move closer to achieving this goal '' anthony fauciscientists experimenting with an innovative treatment for cancer have now devised a targeted injection that has already successfully eliminated tumors in mice could one shot administered directly to a solid tumor mark the end of cancer research devising more effective treatments for all types of cancer has been abundant over the past few years offering new hope all the time some of the most recent experiments include using stateoftheart nanotechnology to hunt down microtumors engineering microbes to thwart cancer cells and starving malignant tumors to death the latest study from stanford university school of medicine in california has investigated the potential of yet another approach injecting `` minute '' amounts of two agents that stimulate the bodys immune response directly into a malignant solid tumor so far their studies using mice have proven successful `` when we use these two agents together '' explains senior study author dr ronald levy `` we see the elimination of tumors all over the body '' '' this approach bypasses the need to identify tumorspecific immune targets and doesnt require wholesale activation of the immune system or customization of a patients immune cells '' dr ronald levy moreover the researchers have reason to believe in a speedier trajectory toward clinical trials for this method since one of the agents involved has already been approved for use in human therapy while the other is already under clinical trial for lymphoma treatment the studys findings were published yesterday in the journal science translational medicine onetime application of formula dr levy specializes in the use of immunotherapy which is a type of treatment wherein the bodys immune response is enhanced so that it can target cancer cells to fight lymphoma or cancer of the lymphatic system there are several types of immunotherapy including some that boost the entire immune system of the body and others that are a lot more targeted but the researchers note they all come with caveats attached crossdressing cells may improve cancer treatment what are `` crossdressing '' cells and how could they help us to fight cancer read now they may have problematic side effects be timeconsuming or be simply too costly the teams method however arguably has more benefits even beyond its potential effectiveness as a treatment '' our approach uses a onetime application of very small amounts of two agents to stimulate the immune cells only within the tumor itself '' dr levy explains this method can `` teach '' immune cells how to fight against that specific type of cancer which then allows them to migrate and destroy all other existing tumors although the immune systems role is to detect and eliminate harmful foreign bodies many types of cancer cell are able to evade detection in complex ways which enables them to grow and spread a type of white blood cell called t cells play a vital role in regulating the bodys immune response normally t cells would target and fight cancer tumors but all too often cancer cells learn to `` trick '' them and escape the immune response effective against many types of cancer in the new study dr levy and his team delivered micrograms of two specific agents into one hard tumor site in each of the affected mice the agents in question were cpg oligonucleotide a short stretch of synthetic dna that boosts the immune cells ability to express a receptor called ox40 which is found on the surface of t cells an antibody that binds to the receptor activating the t cells once the t cells are activated some of them migrate to other parts of the body `` hunting down '' and destroying other tumors importantly dr levy and his colleagues note that this method could be used to target a number of different kinds of cancer in each case the t cells will `` learn '' to deal with the specific type of cancer cell that they have been exposed to in the laboratory the scientists first applied this method to the mouse model of lymphoma and 87 out of 90 mice became cancerfree in the other three cases the tumors did recur but they disappeared when the researchers administered the treatment a second time similarly successful results were observed in the mouse model of breast colon and skin cancer also even the mice that were genetically engineered to develop breast cancer spontaneously responded well to this method of treatment a targeted approach however when scientists transplanted two different types of cancer tumor lymphoma and colon cancer in the same animal but only injected the experimental formula into a lymphoma site the results were mixed all the lymphoma tumors did recede but the same did not hold true for the colon cancer tumor confirming that the t cells only learn to deal with the cancer cells that were in their immediate vicinity before the injection as dr levy continues `` this is a very targeted approach only the tumor that shares the protein targets displayed by the treated site is affected were attacking specific targets without having to identify exactly what proteins the t cells are recognizing '' currently the team is preparing a clinical trial to test the effectiveness of this treatment in people with lowgrade lymphoma dr levy hopes that if the clinical trial is successful they will be able to extend this therapy to virtually any kind of cancer tumor in humans '' i dont think theres a limit to the type of tumor we could potentially treat as long as it has been infiltrated by the immune system '' dr levy concludesthe american college of physicians have now published their new guidelines regarding the desired blood sugar control levels for people with type 2 diabetes the recommendations aim to change current therapeutic practices and doctors should aim for a moderate level of blood sugar when treating their patients blood sugar control levels should be moderate for people living with type 2 diabetes according to new guidelines according to the most recent estimates almost 30 million people in the united states have type 2 diabetes which amounts to over 9 percent of the entire us population once diagnosed with type 2 diabetes patients are often advised to take what is known as a glycated hemoglobin hba1c test in order to keep blood sugar levels under control the test averages a persons blood sugar levels over the past 2 or 3 months with an hba1c score of 65 percent indicating diabetes patients who score over 65 percent would then be prescribed a daily insulin based treatment which they can inject themselves rapidacting injections take effect within 5 to 15 minutes but last for a shorter time of 3 to 5 hours longacting injections take effect after 1 or 2 hours and last for between 14 and 24 hours but some studies have pointed out that the hba1c test may currently be overused in the us and they have suggested that such overtesting may lead to overtreating patients with hypoglycemic drugs these drugs often have a range of side effects such as gastrointestinal problems excessively low blood sugar weight gain and even congestive heart failure additionally as some researchers have pointed out `` excessive testing contributes to the growing problem of waste in healthcare and increased patient burden in diabetes management '' in this context the american college of physicians acp set out to examine the existing guidelines from several organizations and the evidence available in an effort to help physicians make better more informed decisions about treating people with type 2 diabetes their guidelines were published in the journal annals of internal medicine an a1c of 7 to 8 percent is recommended as the acp explain the current rationale behind the existing recommendations of a score of 65 percent or below 7 percent is that keeping blood sugar this low would decrease the risk of microvascular complications over time however the acp found that the evidence for such a reduction is `` inconsistent '' as dr jack ende the president of acp puts it `` our analysis of the evidence behind existing guidelines found that treatment with drugs to targets of 7 percent or less compared to targets of about 8 percent did not reduce deaths or macrovascular complications such as heart attack or stroke but did result in substantial harms '' how can you lower your blood sugar levels here are some alternative ways to reduce your blood sugar levels read now he continues saying `` the evidence shows that for most people with type 2 diabetes achieving an a1c between 7 percent and 8 percent will best balance longterm benefits with harms such as low blood sugar medication burden and costs '' additionally the acp recommend that patients who are 80 years old and above or who live with chronic illnesses such as dementia cancer or congestive heart failure receive a treatment that focuses on reducing high blood sugarrelated symptoms instead of lowering hba1c levels the reason for this is that for patients in this category the potential side effects of hypoglycemic drugs outweigh the advantages '' results from studies included in all the guidelines demonstrate that health outcomes are not improved by treating to a1c levels below 65 percent '' dr ende explains '' however reducing drug interventions for patients with a1c levels persistently below 65 percent '' he continues `` will reduce unnecessary medication harms burdens and costs without negatively impacting the risk of death heart attacks strokes kidney failure amputations visual impairment or painful neuropathy '' '' although acps guidance statement focuses on drug therapy to control blood sugar a lower treatment target is appropriate if it can be achieved with diet and lifestyle modifications such as exercise dietary changes and weight loss '' dr jack endeas much of the world experiences a recordbreaking heat wave this spotlight turns its attention to vitamin d the socalled sunshine vitamin here we inspect the latest research the `` sunshine vitamin '' has a range of surprising benefits vitamin d is a hot topic currently with a raft of studies proclaiming its benefits for a variety of serious conditions conversely other recent studies have been more cautious questioning its perceived usefulness for treating some illnesses vitamin d is a nutrient that is synthesized in our skin when it is exposed to sunlight and it is also present in some foods sunlight is the best source of vitamin d but in the winter months the national institutes of health nih recommend topping up vitamin d levels by eating vitamin dcontaining foods each day these include oily fish fortified milk beef liver egg yolks mushrooms and fortified breakfast cereals what does vitamin d do scientists know that vitamin d is essential for many aspects of maintaining good health and that deficiency is linked with problems for both physical and mental health perhaps most notably vitamin d helps to regulate the levels of calcium in our bodies strengthening our bones and preventing boneweakening conditions such as osteoporosis increasingly though studies are also suggesting that vitamin d might have protective benefits against heart failure diabetes cancer respiratory tract infections autoimmune disease and even hair loss a surprisingly large number of people have insufficient levels of vitamin d for instance according to one study more than 40 percent of adults in the united states are deficient because of its prevalence it is important to determine what the public health implications of this epidemic might be symptoms of vitamin d deficiency can vary between individuals but they typically include pain in the joints muscles or bones fatigue breathing problems and low mood or seasonal affective disorder sad below we run through a number of intriguing recent studies that investigate associations between vitamin d and an assortment of illnesses vitamin d and heart failure several studies have suggested that vitamin d could offer protective benefits against cardiovascular illness but scientists have yet to pinpoint what mechanisms are driving this association recently though medical news today reported on a study that used a mouse model to investigate how a type of vitamin d called 125dihydroxyvitamin d3 affects heart cells in particular the researchers looked at the cells responsible for developing scar tissue following a heart attack called cardiac colonyforming unit fibroblasts ccfufs ccfufs are an important area of study because when heart tissue is scarred the heart has a harder time pumping blood which can lead to heart failure the researchers behind the study found that vitamin d inhibited the action of ccfufs which prevented scar tissue from building around the hearts of the mice in the study potentially preventing blockages in the cardiovascular system '' with further study '' wrote the authors `` vitamin d could prove to be an exciting lowcost addition to current treatments and we hope to progress these findings into clinical trials for humans '' vitamin d and cancer breast cancer and bowel cancer have both been linked with cases of vitamin d deficiency in recent studies one of these analyzed data from two randomized clinical trials and a prospective cohort study the researchers found that high levels of vitamin d were inversely associated with risk of breast cancer among women who were cancerfree at baseline studies suggest that vitamin d impacts breast cancer risk according to the study results the higher the levels of vitamin d the lower the risk of breast cancer this relationship remained significant even after the results were adjusted for confounding factors such as age body mass index bmi intake of calcium supplements and smoking habits although a link between vitamin d deficiency and colorectal cancer has previously been reported not all studies have been able to replicate these findings a new largescale study attempted to settle this by drawing on data from three continents including 5700 colorectal cancer cases and 7100 controls antifungal drug kills dormant colorectal cancer cells new research suggests that an existing antifungal drug could be effective against particularly persistent colorectal cancer cells read now the researchers calculated that people whose levels of vitamin d fall below those specified in the current guidelines have a 31 percent increased risk of developing bowel cancer by contrast those with vitamin d levels above the current recommended levels were 22 percent less likely to develop this cancer vitamin d and belly fat another recent study examined a previously observed link between obesity and lower levels of vitamin d focusing in particular on how different types of body fat might interact with vitamin d the study authors reported that having excess belly fat was linked with lower levels of vitamin d '' the strong relationship between increasing amounts of abdominal fat and lower levels of vitamin d suggests that individuals with larger waistlines are at a greater risk of developing deficiency and should consider having their vitamin d levels checked '' however the study was not able to prove whether a deficiency in vitamin d causes fat to be stored around the belly or if having belly fat somehow contributes to a deficiency in vitamin d the researchers say that future studies will attempt to determine cause and effect in this relationship vitamin d and alzheimers disease a systematic review from researchers in australia recently attempted to settle the debate surrounding vitamin ds ability to protect against alzheimers the systematic review analyzed more than 70 studies looking at the association they concluded that there was no significant association between vitamin d deficiency and risk of alzheimers intriguingly the authors did suggest that based on their systematic review there may be an association between exposure to the suns ultraviolet rays and protection against multiple sclerosis parkinsons disease and alzheimers but that this may be independent of vitamin d production the authors said that further studies would be needed to confirm these links and identify the mechanism responsible for such associations vitamin d and chronic pain over the years some scientists have theorized that low levels of vitamin d might cause or worsen chronic pain so in 2015 a group of scientists set out to collate existing evidence to examine the relationship could vitamin d ease chronic pain the resulting cochrane review updated in 2015 explains that '' observational and circumstantial evidence suggests that there may be a role for vitamin d deficiency in the etiology of chronic painful conditions '' the team scrutinized the findings from a number of studies following the analysis they concluded that the available scientific evidence is not strong enough to support a connection between vitamin d deficiency and chronic pain the authors write `` based on this evidence a large beneficial effect of vitamin d across different chronic painful conditions is unlikely whether vitamin d can have beneficial effects in specific chronic painful conditions needs further investigation '' so as ever more work will be needed to finally close the lid on this interaction we hope this article has enhanced your understanding of the latest scientific thinking around this fascinating chemical please remember however that overexposure to sunlight especially the hot midday sun can result in skin damage and increase risk of skin cancerit is still unclear what causes multiple sclerosis but new research closes in on the faulty immune system mechanisms involved in the development of this condition new research has identified another type of immune cell that may play a role in ms multiple sclerosis ms which is an autoimmune disease causes the immune system to mistakenly attack myelin myelin is the substance that coats axons which are the projections that allow neurons to connect and transmit information this process is known as demyelination and it affects the correct functioning of the central nervous system the condition is characterized by problems with balance and coordination as well as with eyesight to name but a few of its effects in the united states ms affects 250000–350000 people researchers still dont know for sure what causes ms but little by little they are uncovering the mechanisms at play and revealing more of the cellular culprits involved now neurologist roland martin and immunologist mireia sospedra at the university of zurich and university hospital zurich both in switzerland and colleagues have shown that a type of immune cell called b cells are key to the autoimmune reactions that characterize ms in a study whose results are now published in the journal cell the scientists explain that b cells influence the activity of another type of immune cell t cells which then cause inflammation '' we were able to show for the first time that certain b cells the cells of the immune system that produce antibodies activate the specific t cells that cause inflammation in the brain and nerve cell lesions '' roland martin b cells influence t cells studies into ms will tend to focus on the role played by t cells in the development of this condition since t cells are tasked with triggering an appropriate immune response once they detect the presence of pathogens when t cells malfunction and mistake healthy cells in the body for pathogens this causes harmful lesions and inflammation associated with autoimmune diseases such as ms ms new drug proven to slow brain shrinkage will this new drug vastly improve ms treatment read now martin and colleagues however found that the t cells may actually be mistakenly activated by other specialized immune cells the b cells this became apparent to the researchers after they observed the effects of certain drugs used to treat ms martin says `` a class of ms drugs called rituximab and ocrelizumab led us to believe that b cells also played an important part in the pathogenesis of the disease '' these drugs the authors note halt brain inflammation by removing b cells which suggests that these immune cells are ultimately responsible for the t cells activity a chain of reactions in order to better understand the role played by b cells in inflammation the researchers analyzed blood samples from people with ms through an experimental in vitro method they noticed that b cells were interacting with specialized t cells boosting their activity and influencing them to divide more thus feeding their attack cycle it became clear that b cells were the cause of t cell activity because when they eliminated the former the latter stopped proliferating '' this means that we can now explain the previously unclear mechanism of these ms drugs '' explains martin the investigators also note that the activated t cells they studied in the blood samples include the population of t cells that are active in brain inflammation related to ms martin and his team suggest that the t cells are able to read both the proteins released by b cells and recognize the nerve cells in the brain the scientists say that t cells are first activated in the peripheral blood only to migrate to the brain where they end up attacking myelin '' our findings not only explain how new ms drugs take effect but also pave the way for novel approaches in basic research and therapy for ms '' says martinafter tumor removal surgery treatment with erectile dysfunction drugs and a flu vaccine may help to stop the cancer returning these common medications could help to prevent cancer returning these drugs aided by the flu vaccine remove a block to the immune system that can sometimes result from cancer surgery and also give it a boost this was the conclusion that researchers at the university of ottawa in canada came to after they tested the effect of tadalafil cialis sildenafil viagra and an inactivated version of the flu vaccine agriflu in mouse models of postsurgery metastasis in a paper now published in the journal oncoimmunology they report how the unusual combination reduced cancer spread in the mice by over 90 percent a clinical trial to test the effects and safety of the treatment in humans is already under way googleadslotinfopush { '' slotname '' mnt_dlb1 '' slotcontainer '' mnt_dlb1_container } surgery can promote metastasis '' surgery '' says senior study author rebecca c auer an associate professor in the department of biochemistry microbiology and immunology `` is very effective in removing solid tumors '' but as she and her colleagues explain in their paper `` cancer surgery '' can also block the immune systems ability to eliminate any remaining cancer cells which can then spread to form new secondary tumors in a process known as metastasis viagra may cut colorectal cancer risk by half giving mice a small daily dose of viagra reduced the formation of polyps by 50 percent read now metastasis accounts for the vast majority of deaths to cancer and is the main reason that the disease is so serious the immune system has many cells that patrol the body in search of potentially harmful agents to destroy these agents are not just bacteria viruses and other pathogens but also cancer cells cancer surgery can undermine the immune system by `` altering the function of natural killer nk cells '' which are white blood cells that play a key role in clearing away metastatic cancer cells googleadslotinfopush { '' slotname '' mnt_dlb2 '' slotcontainer '' mnt_dlb2_container } surgery weakens natural killer cells tests of animals and human patients have shown that tumor surgery can weaken the ability of nk cells to attack and kill cancer cells for up to 1 month after the procedure prof auer and colleagues found that surgery does this in a roundabout way it stimulates another group of immune cells called myeloid derived suppressor cells mdscs which in turn will then inhibit the nk cells the new study shows that the erectile dysfunction drugs remove the brakes on the nk cells by targeting the `` surgeryinduced '' mdscs while the flu vaccine gives the nk cells an additional boost the researchers tested various combinations of the drugs and vaccine in mouse models of postoperative metastasis they evaluated the effectiveness of treatment by counting the number of metastases that arose in the lungs of the animals the results showed that on average without surgery the cancer spread and gave rise to 37 metastases surgery with no drugs or vaccine resulted in 129 metastases giving one erectile dysfunction drug after surgery limited the spread to 24 metastases giving one erectile dysfunction drug and the flu vaccine after surgery limited spread to just 11 metastases clinical trial the clinical trial that is already under way involves 24 patients who are having surgery to remove an abdominal tumor at the ottawa hospital the purpose of the small trial is to evaluate the safety of the treatment which is based on cialis and agriflu and observe how it affects the immune system should the trial be successful the next stage will be larger trials that assess the potential benefits prof auer says that she and her colleagues are `` really excited '' about their work because it may show that `` two safe and relatively inexpensive therapies may be able to solve a big problem in cancer '' '' if confirmed in clinical trials this could become the first therapy to address the immune problems caused by cancer surgery '' prof rebecca c auera new study conducted by researchers at stanford university in california reveals that common foods can cause blood sugar spikes in otherwise healthy people paying closer attention to these spikes could prevent diabetes and some of its complications over the course of a day blood sugar levels may spike to diabetic and prediabetic levels even in healthy individuals diabetes affects over 30 million people in the united states which is almost 10 percent of the population an additional 84 million people have prediabetes abnormal blood sugar levels are a hallmark of this metabolic disease to measure these levels physicians use two main methods they either take fasting blood sugar samples which informs them of the level of sugar in the blood at that specific point or they measure levels of glycated hemoglobin hba1c the glycated hemoglobin test is routinely used to diagnose diabetes and it relies on the average levels of blood sugar over a period of 3 months despite their widespread use neither of these methods can say anything about the fluctuations in blood sugar that happen over the course of a day so researchers led by michael snyder who is a professor of genetics at stanford set out to monitor these daily fluctuations in otherwise healthy individuals they looked at the patterns of blood sugar change after a meal and examined how these patterns vary between different people who have had the same meal prof snyder and colleagues published the results of their research in the journal plos biology three types of blood sugar variability for their study the researchers recruited 57 adults aged 51 years on average who had not been diagnosed with diabetes prof snyder and team used novel devices called continuous glucose monitors to assess the blood sugar of the participants in their normal environment also the researchers evaluated the participants wholebody insulin resistance and insulin secretion the blood sugar and metabolic measurements allowed the researchers to group the participants into three different `` glucotypes '' based on the patterns of blood sugar variability type 2 diabetes new guidelines lower blood sugar control levels the latest recommendations from the american college of physicians aim to change how physicians treat their patients read now people whose blood sugar did not vary much were grouped under `` low variability '' those whose blood sugar was found to spike quite often were grouped under `` severe variability '' and finally people who fell in between were classified as the `` moderate '' glucotype the findings revealed that `` glucose dysregulation as characterized by continuous glucose monitoring is more prevalent and heterogeneous than previously thought and can affect individuals considered normoglycemic by standard measures '' glucose often in prediabetic diabetic range next the researchers wanted to see how people of different glucotypes reacted to the same meal so they offered all the participants three types of standard breakfasts cornflakes with milk bread with peanut butter and a protein bar each participant responded uniquely to these breakfasts which suggests that different people metabolize the same food in different ways additionally the study revealed that common foods such as corn flakes caused significant blood sugar spikes in most people '' we were very surprised to see blood sugar in the prediabetic and diabetic range in these people so frequently the idea is to try to find out what makes someone a spiker and be able to give them actionable advice to shift them into the low glucotype '' prof michael snyder '' our next study will delve into the physiological causes of glucose dysregulation '' continues the senior investigator `` these include not only genetic variation but also microbiome composition and pancreas liver and digestive organ functions '' the researchers hope that their recent and future findings will help to prevent diabetes and its complicationsnumerous people in the united states and across the world are dog lovers and no wonder dogs can be loyal loving friends and a source of spontaneous joy but dogs that are stressed scared injured or ill can easily cause harm to unsuspecting humans is our behavior part of the problem a new study looks to youtube videos to understand why some dogs bite and who is more likely to get bitten dogs are for the most part our best friends many of us have given in to the temptation of petting a strangers adorable trusting dog as it passed us on our evening walk in most cases nothing other than a moment of delight with a friendly animal takes place sometimes however dogs have been known to turn from friend to foe and suddenly snap and bite at a hand outstretched to pat some studies suggest that all in all around 1000 persons end up in emergency rooms every day due to dog bites and in some cases infected wounds may place a person at risk of rabies or tetanus but the reasons behind why dogs that may otherwise seem affectionate and approachable become aggressive are not always straightforward and researchers dont have much to go on to try to understand why humans most loyal companion unexpectedly becomes aggressive at times usually data rely on information provided by individuals who have already been bitten and they may only offer an incomplete or unreliable account of the encounter but recently investigators from the university of liverpool in the united kingdom have turned to an unexpected source of information that they hope may offer a better perspective on the context in which biting takes place youtube videos '' online videos present us with an unexplored opportunity to observe dog bites firsthand something which is just not possible using other methods '' says lead study author sara owczarczakgarstecka adding '' making more use of this type of shared content for research could help us better understand how and why bites occur and contribute to the development of bite prevention strategies '' the researchers findings were published in the journal scientific reports children and infants get bitten more often the scientists methodology was fairly simple they used telling keywords including `` dog bite '' and `` dog attack '' to search youtube for videos depicting individuals getting bitten by dogs owczarczakgarstecka and team ended up analyzing 143 clips showing 362 bites uploaded to the popular website between january 2016 and march 2017 in each case the researchers assessed the context in which the dog ended up biting a person the severity of the bite who got bitten and what breed the dog pertained to in 56 of the clips the researchers were also able to ascertain what behavior both humans and dogs exhibited prior to the bite owczarczakgarstecka and team found that of the dog breeds often chosen as pets it was mostly chihuahuas german shepherds pit bulls and labrador retrievers that appeared to do the biting yet more often than not the `` offenders '' were crossbreed dogs how does rabies cause aggression dogs infected with rabies become extremely aggressive and dangerous what are the biological mechanisms behind this disease read now about 7 in 10 of the people who got bitten were male and in more than half of the situations the victims were children or infants the researchers warn that due to the relatively small number of video samples that they analyzed they were unable to establish clear relationships of causality between certain types of human behavior and instances of aggression in dogs however they did note that in many cases `` tactile contact with a dog '' became more insistent 21 seconds before the biting and that individuals getting bitten often stood or leant over the dog still owczarczakgarstecka and team admit that they struggled with some limitations especially the fact that youtube videos may be biased users the researchers surmised may be more likely to upload videos in which small dogs such as chihuahuas do the biting as these may be perceived as funnier and more likely to attract a larger number of viewers the researchers next step from here will be to study the behavior of people who interact with dogs in greater depth as well as their perception of dog bites and when they take place in order to do so they plan to interview dog owners people who work with dogs and those who have previously been bitten '' the findings '' owczarczakgarstecka explains `` could offer some valuable new insight for the development of bite prevention strategies '' '' prevention messages could emphasize the risk of leaning over a dog and simply advise avoiding contact with a dog when possible or in doubt '' she concludesdespite our best efforts to remain thin it seems that during the holiday season we put on a lot of weight why is that a new study has a surprising answer how much sunlight we get may influence how much weight we lose suggests new research plenty of us are familiar with the holiday weight phenomenon but while it is true that during the holidays were more exposed to delicious food than the rest of the year some studies have shown that in winter we continue to pack on the pounds despite conscious efforts to lose them why a new study by researchers at the university of alberta in edmonton canada reveals an unexpected culprit for winter weight gain the absence of sunlight the researchers who were led by the auspiciously named peter light from the alberta diabetes institute examined the effect of sunlight on subcutaneous fat cells or white fat cells that can be found right beneath our skin the results of their investigation make this a breakthrough study and it was recently published in the journal scientific reports how sunlight burns fat light and team examined the socalled subcutaneous white adipose tissue scwat which as the authors explain is the `` major fat depot in humans and a central player in regulating whole body metabolism '' white fat is known as the `` bad '' type of fat because it stores calories that are ideally burned for energy if dysfunctional this type of fat can lead to cardiometabolic disorders such as obesity diabetes and heart disease new drug could shrink harmful fat cells what if there was a magic pill that could help you to lose weight without any of the effort read now so in an attempt to help people with type 1 diabetes light and colleagues were working on a way to genetically engineer these white fat cells to produce insulin when exposed to light accidentally they discovered that scwat cells tend to shrink under the effect of the suns socalled blue light that is the visible type of light that boosts attention and mood during the day to further test their discovery the scientists took samples of scwat from patients undergoing weight loss surgery and examined the effect of the suns blue light on the fat cells this is what they found '' when the suns blue light wavelengths the light we can see with our eye penetrate our skin and reach the fat cells just beneath lipid droplets reduce in size and are released out of the cell in other words our cells dont store as much fat '' peter light winter weight gain explained '' if you flip our findings around '' light says `` the insufficient sunlight exposure we get 8 months of the year living in a northern climate may be promoting fat storage and contribute to the typical weight gain some of us have over winter '' '' its early days but its not a giant leap to suppose that the light that regulates our circadian rhythm received through our eyes may also have the same impact through the fat cells near our skin '' he adds the findings may pave the way for new weight loss strategies or lightbased therapies in the treatment of obesity and diabetes however light cautions against taking these findings too literally and pursuing sunlight exposure in order to lose weight as there are still many variables that remain unknown '' for example '' he explains `` we dont yet know the intensity and duration of light necessary for this pathway to be activated '' additionally he notes `` there is a lot of literature out there suggesting our current generation will be more overweight than their parents and maybe this feeds into the debate about what is healthy sunshine exposure '' either way this exciting discovery `` certainly holds many fascinating clues for our team and others around the world to explore '' light concludestoo much salt can cause cognitive deficits according to a new study published in the journal nature neuroscience luckily these negative effects may be reversed and the new study shows how too much salt in our diet can have devastating effects on our brain power and new research reveals the mechanism behind this its a wellknown fact that too much salt in our diet raises the risk of cardiovascular disease and high blood pressure but it is less known that brainrelated problems such as cerebrovascular disease stroke and cognitive impairment have all been linked to dietary salt as the authors of the new research explain it was suggested that one possible mechanism behind these negative effects involves the socalled endothelial cells inside the cerebral blood vessels endothelial cells line our blood vessels and are responsible for regulating the vascular tone but a high dietary intake of salt has been associated with dysfunction of these cells although it is known that epithelial dysfunction can bring a plethora of chronic illnesses it remains unclear exactly how saltinduced endothelial dysfunction may affect the brain in the long run this is particularly important given that the brain is heavily reliant on a steady and smooth flow of oxygen to function properly explain the study authors who were led in their research efforts by costantino iadecola from weill cornell medicine in new york city ny in their paper iadecola and colleagues show how excessive dietary salt affects our gut immune system and ultimately our brain how excessive salt affects the gutbrain axis iadecola and team fed a group of mice the equivalent of a human diet high in salt for a period of 12 weeks after the first few weeks endothelial dysfunction as well as a reduction in the blood flow to the brain could be noticed in the mice additionally behavioral tests revealed cognitive decline in the rodents their blood pressure however remained unchanged an important discovery was the increase in the guts socalled th17 white blood cells in turn the high number of th17 cells led to an increase in the levels of a proinflammatory molecule called plasma interleukin17 il17 researchers reveal how to boost brain power scientists reveal a braintraining method proven to boost your working memory read now the researchers were also able to identify the molecular pathway through which higher levels of il17 in the blood led to the negative cognitive and cerebrovascular effects the researchers wanted to see whether or not their findings would replicate in human cells so they treated human endothelial cells with il17 and obtained similar results as iadecola and his colleagues explain '' the findings unveil a gutbrain axis by which environmental factors linked to the diet lead to an adaptive immune response in the gut promoting neurovascular dysregulation and cognitive impairment '' dietary changes can reverse negative effects the good news is that the negative effects of the highsalt diet seem to be reversible the mice were returned to a normal diet after the 12 weeks and the results were encouraging '' the harmful effects of a highsalt diet were abrogated by returning the mice to a normal diet pointing to the reversibility of the vascular dysfunction and cognitive impairment '' write the authors additionally they experimented with a drug that also reversed the effects of excessive salt the amino acid larginine had the same beneficial effect on the mice as returning them to a normal diet the findings suggest that lifestyle changes or a new class of drugs may help to offset the negative effects of a highsalt dietnew research published in the journal appetite suggests that when it comes to dieting its not how much you eat but rather what you eat that influences calorie intake the most opting for more healthful foods such as salads may be more important than the amount of food that we eat faris zuraikat a graduate student in the department of nutritional sciences at pennsylvania state university led the new study which follows up from a previous 1year randomized controlled trial that investigated how different food portions influenced weight loss the former trial aimed to explore the socalled `` portion size effect '' which occurs when people are served bigger portions than what they originally wanted but end up eating more nonetheless to this end the previous trial trained the participants to gain more control over their portions presenting them with useful strategies for portion size management in this new trial study the researchers wanted to see if people who had been previously trained to manage their portions would respond differently to increasing portion sizes by comparison with untrained people as the studys first author explains the researchers `` were also interested in whether those untrained individuals with overweight and obesity or normal weight differed in their response '' calorie intake vs portion size effect to find out the researchers gathered three groups of women 34 women who were overweight and had not participated in the previous trial 29 healthy `` control '' women who had a regular weight and who had also not participated in the trial and finally 39 women with overweight and obesity who had taken part in the portioncontrolling trial during the study all women were served the same foods once a week for 4 weeks but the size of their food increased in a random order what are the best foods for weight loss in the spirit of `` its not how much you eat but what you eat '' here are some foods that promote weight loss according to available research read now additionally and significantly the calorie content of the food served also varied the foods ranged from highcalorie ones such as garlic bread to lowcalorie foods such as salads the study revealed that when given bigger portions the women across all three groups consumed more food however the participants who had been trained in portion control in the previous trial consumed fewer calories than the untrained participants '' the lower energy intake of trained participants was attributable to consuming meals with a greater proportion of lowerenergy density foods than controls '' write the authors '' all the groups were served the same meals but their food choices differed '' explains the studys lead author `` the participants who went through the training consumed more of the lower caloriedense foods and less of the higher caloriedense foods than the untrained controls '' '' consequently trained participants calorie intake was less than that of the control groups whose intake didnt differ by weight status '' why choosing lowcalorie food is important the studys lead researcher explains the significance of the findings saying `` the results show that choosing healthy lowercaloriedense foods was more effective and more sustainable than just trying to resist large portions of higher calorie options '' '' if you choose highcaloriedense foods but restrict the amount that youre eating portions will be too small and youre likely to get hungry '' zuraikat goes on barbara rolls a professor of nutritional sciences at penn state and a coauthor on the study also chimes in '' the study supports the idea that eating less of the highercaloriedense foods and more of the nutritious lowercaloriedense foods can help to manage hunger while consuming fewer calories '' barbara rolls '' you still have a full plate '' she adds `` but youre changing the proportions of the different types of foods '' the findings are particularly significant given that people who want to lose weight are often told that eating `` a bit of everything '' helps as long as the food is consumed in moderation on the contrary the new research seems to suggest that opting for more nutritious lowcalorie foods is far more important than trying to eat lessthe findings of a new study might hold promise for the future of treating chronic autoimmune conditions such as systemic lupus and autoimmune liver disease according to its authors researchers suggest that targeting a specific gut bacterium could help to prevent autoimmune disease in the study researchers from yale university in new haven ct discovered that bacteria in the small intestine can travel to other organs and induce an autoimmune response importantly the team also found that this reaction can be treated by targeting the bacteria with an antibiotic or vaccine the study results were recently published in the journal science in autoimmune diseases the immune system mistakingly attacks healthy cells and tissues some of the most common autoimmune diseases include type 1 diabetes lupus and celiac disease according to the national institutes of health nih around 235 million people in the united states are affected by autoimmune diseases a variety of autoimmune conditions have been linked to bacteria in the gut using a mouse model the yale team specifically looked at a bacterium called enterococcus gallinarum which can travel beyond the gut to the spleen lymph nodes and liver the team found that e gallinarum provoked an autoimmune response in the mice when it traveled beyond the gut the researchers were able to replicate this mechanism using cultured human liver cells and they also found e gallinarum to be present in the livers of people who have autoimmune disease how your gut bacteria may protect you from cancer not all gut bacteria are bad researchers reveal how they could help to prevent cancer read now by administering an antibiotic or vaccine to target e gallinarum the scientists then found that it was possible to suppress the autoimmune reaction in the mice and prevent the bacterium from growing '' when we blocked the pathway leading to inflammation '' says senior study author martin kriegel `` we could reverse the effect of this bug on autoimmunity '' '' the vaccine against e gallinarum was a specific approach as vaccinations against other bacteria we investigated did not prevent mortality and autoimmunity '' martin kriegel kriegel adds that the team plans to further study the biological mechanisms that are associated with e gallinarum and the implications that they might have for systemic lupus and autoimmune liver disease study adds to previous research the new study complements previous studies that have uncovered a link between gut bacteria and autoimmune diseases studies in mice for example have found that the colonization of the gut by some bacteria can lay the groundwork for the development of autoimmune disorders in the future these bacteria can cause changes in the tissue of the gut resulting in the production of antibodies that attack cells in conditions such as systemic lupus previously medical news today covered a study that suggested that altering gut bacteria might help to alleviate lupus symptoms the study published in the journal applied and environmental microbiology showed that species of lactobacillus in the gut of a lupus mouse model were linked to a reduction of lupus symptoms while the lachnospiraceae bacteria were associated with worsening symptoms of lupus '' the use of probiotics prebiotics and antibiotics '' said husen zhang first author of that study `` has the potential to alter microbiota dysbiosis which in turn could improve lupus symptoms ''new data presented at the annual meeting of the endocrine society held in chicago il suggests that consuming lowcalorie sweeteners could put people at risk of metabolic syndrome are lowcalorie sweeteners worse for health than they seem around 34 percent of adults in the united states have metabolic syndome the umbrella term for high blood pressure high blood sugar high cholesterol levels and abdominal fat we know that metabolic syndrome doubles the risk of heart disease and disease of the blood vessels putting individuals at risk of heart disease and stroke people with metabolic syndrome are also three to five times more likely to develop type 2 diabetes recently on medical news today we looked at how metabolic syndrome could be managed by yoga a study published in the scandinavian journal of medicine science in sports found that participants who took part in a yearlong yoga training course demonstrated a decrease in proinflammatory adipokines and an increase antiinflammatory adipokines adipokines are signaling proteins that instruct the immune system to either increase or decrease inflammation so it appeared that yoga benefitted the people with metabolic syndrome by reducing inflammation allowing them to better manage their symptoms another recent study even suggested that compounds found in beer could provide significant health benefits for people with metabolic syndrome by helping to improve insulin resistance in the new study researchers from george washington university in washington dc examined the effects of a lowcalorie sweetener called sucralose on human stem cells from fat tissue these were experimented on in petri dishes that simulated an obesitypromoting environment lowcalorie sweeteners increase fat formation study finds learn more about how lowcalorie sweeteners may actually increase the formation of fat read now the scientists mimicked the typical concentration of sucralose in the blood of people who consume high quantities of lowcalorie sweeteners when this was administered to the stem cells the team noticed increased expression of genes linked with fat production and inflammation the authors followed this up with a separate experiment involving biopsy samples of abdominal fat from people who were regular consumers of lowcalorie sweeteners in fat samples from people that were a healthy weight they did not find a significant increase in gene expression but in the fat samples from overweight or obese participants there was significant overexpression of fatproducing and inflammationinducing genes the study authors believe that these patterns in gene expression create conditions favorable to metabolic syndrome which in turn increases risk of prediabetes and diabetes findings should be of concern study coauthor sabyasachi sen who is an associate professor of medicine at george washington university describes the results '' our stem cellbased studies indicate that lowcalorie sweeteners promote additional fat accumulation within cells compared with cells not exposed to these substances in a dosedependent fashion meaning that as the dose of sucralose is increased more cells showed increased fat droplet accumulation '' '' this most likely occurs by increasing glucose entry into cells through increased activity of genes called glucose transporters '' prof sen explains that these findings should be of particular concern to people who are obese and have prediabetes or diabetes as these people are already at increased risk for heart attack and strokes the scientists believe that the overexpression in fatrelated genes is more pronounced in these people because they have increased amounts of glucose in their blood which creates insulin resistanceusing a new approach scientists have located a compound that stops the spread of breast pancreatic and prostate cancers in mice cancer metastasis could one day be halted by metarrestin the compound which they call metarrestin destroys a unique structure inside the nucleus of cancer cells that can spread and form new tumors a paper on the work in which researchers from the national institutes of health nih collaborated with those from northwestern university feinberg school of medicine in chicago il is published in science translational medicine in describing how metarrestin works cocorresponding study author sui huang who works as an associate professor of cell and molecular biology at northwestern university feinberg school of medicine likens it to a `` dirty bomb against cancer '' '' it could potentially result in a better outcome for patients with solid tumor cancers with high potential to spread to other organs '' she adds metastasis the final frontier cancer would not be such a potentially serious disease if it were not capable of metastasis which is a complex process wherein cancer cells escape the primary tumor and invade nearby or distant tissue to form new secondary tumors '' what kills people '' prof huang explains `` is when cancer spreads to other organs such as when breast cancer spreads to the brain liver lungs or bones '' cancer new drug may fight treatment resistance a new compound that blocks a molecule that cancer cells use to transcribe genetic information shows promise in treating drugresistant tumors read now metastasis is sometimes referred to as `` the last frontier of cancer research '' it accounts for around 90 percent of cancer deaths and this figure has not altered much in half a century once a cancer reaches the metastatic stage it becomes very difficult to treat with current methods which are much more effective at tackling the primary tumor '' many drugs '' explains cocorresponding study author dr juan jose marugan group leader of the chemical genomics center at the nihs national center for advancing translational sciences in rockville md `` are aimed at stopping cancer growth and killing cancer cells '' but so far no drug has been approved that is designed specifically against metastasis he adds metarrestin kills perinucleolar compartments metarrestin destroys a littleunderstood structure inside the nucleus of cancer cells that is known as the `` perinucleolar compartment pnc '' tests on laboratorycultured cancer cells and cells sampled from human tumors have shown that `` pncs selectively form in cells from solid tumors '' also in previous work prof huang and her team had discovered that the likelihood of cancer spread was greater when tumor cells had more pncs this led the team to wonder whether attacking pncs might reduce cancer spread and improve patients prospects in this study the scientists used `` highthroughput screening followed by chemical optimization '' to assess which compound from a list of at least 140000 might have the greatest power to destroy pncs in metastatic cancer cells they whittled down the list to 100 compounds and then they identified one that destroyed pncs in metastatic prostate cancer cells a modified version of the compound became metarrestin which `` significantly inhibited metastasis '' in mice grafted with human pancreatic breast and prostate cancer the treated mice also lived longer than untreated mice the researchers intend to apply for metarrestin to enter the food and drug administration fda new drug investigation process later this year after they have run more preclinical tests and collected the data required '' our results show metarrestin is a very promising agent that we should continue to investigate against metastasis '' dr juan jose marugannight shift work has long been linked to poor health now a new study suggests that for women such working patterns could increase the risk of cancer female night shift workers may be at greater cancer risk researchers warn researchers found that women who engaged in longterm night shifts were almost a fifth more likely to develop cancer when compared with women who did not work such shifts on looking at specific cancers the researchers found that women who worked longterm night shifts were at even greater risk of skin cancer breast cancer and lung cancer study coauthor xuelei ma phd of the west china medical center at sichuan university in china and colleagues recently reported their findings in the journal cancer epidemiology biomarkers prevention according to the centers for disease control and prevention cdc nearly 15 million people in the united states have irregular working patterns including night shifts previous research has shown that night shift work can severely disrupt our circadian rhythm this is the internal clock that regulates the bodys physiological processes over a 24hour cycle and it primarily responds to light and dark in the environment shift work has been linked to a wealth of poor health outcomes including obesity heart disease and some types of cancer in the new study ma and colleagues sought to learn more about the link between longterm night shift work and cancer risk overall cancer risk increased by 19 percent the researchers came to their findings by conducting a metaanalysis of 61 studies these included a total of 3909152 participants and more than 114000 cancer cases subjects were from asia australia europe and north america the team used these data to assess how longterm night shift work was associated with the risk of developing 11 cancer types in a separate analysis the researchers looked at whether longterm night shift work among female nurses was linked to the risk of six cancer types how does alcohol cause cancer researchers shed light on how alcohol consumption may lead to the development of cancer read now overall the new study revealed that women who worked longterm night shifts were at 19 percent greater risk of cancer compared with women who did not work longterm night shifts additionally the researchers found that women who engaged in longterm night shift work had a 41 percent greater risk of skin cancer a 32 percent greater risk of breast cancer and an 18 percent increased risk of gastrointestinal cancer in a doseresponse analysis it was also found that each additional 5 years of night shift work was associated with 33 percent increase in breast cancer risk the researchers report further investigation however revealed that the link between night shift work and greater breast cancer risk was only applicable for women who lived in north america or europe '' it is possible that women in these locations have higher sex hormone levels '' ma suggests `` which have been positively associated with hormonerelated cancers such as breast cancer '' a risk factor for common cancers from the analysis of female nurses alone the researchers found that longterm night shift work was linked to a 58 percent greater risk of breast cancer a 35 percent increased risk of gastrointestinal cancer and a 28 percent greater lung cancer risk discussing the possible reasons for the increased cancer risk among female nurses ma speculates that these women may have been more likely to undergo cancer screening due to their profession '' another possible explanation for the increased cancer risk in this population may relate to the job requirements of night shift nursing such as more intensive shifts '' adds ma overall the scientists say that their findings indicate that more needs to be done to protect the health of female shift workers particularly those who engage in such shifts for many years '' our study indicates that night shift work serves as a risk factor for common cancers in women these results might help establish and implement effective measures to protect female night shifters longterm night shift workers should have regular physical examinations and cancer screenings '' xuelei ma phd ma adds that he hopes that this research will encourage larger cohort studies in order to confirm the link between longterm night shift work and cancer among womenmultiple sclerosis can cause debilitating fatigue vision problems impaired balance and coordination and muscle stiffness it is usually disabling and its causes have not yet been clearly identified research from switzerland identifies a key factor that allows immune cells to attack neurons potentially triggering ms in multiple sclerosis ms our immune system mistakenly attacks myelin or the sheath that covers the axon the axon is the projection that allows brain cells to send electric signals carrying information as the damage occurs various functions such as motor and cognitive functions and sight are gradually impaired according to atlas an ms resource put together jointly by the world health organization who and the ms international federation in 2008 on a global level `` the median estimated prevalence of ms is 30 per 100000 '' and the united states has one of the highest prevalences of ms cases what exactly causes ms is yet unclear meaning that currently treatments focus on managing the symptoms of the condition rather than eliminating its biological triggers but emerging research from the university of geneva and the geneva university hospitals both in switzerland may have just brought us one step closer to understanding what drives the development of this disease '' we decided '' explains senior researcher doron merkler `` to analyze the infectious factors in ms by studying the autoimmune reactions provoked by different pathogens '' '' this was to try to pinpoint an element that might influence the development of ms where there has been an infection '' he adds the teams findings were published yesterday in the journal immunity viral pathogen triggers autoimmunity merkler and team decided to test out the immune systems reaction to two different pathogens or diseasecausing bacteria a viral and a bacterial one to understand what might trigger a response consistent with the development of ms to do so they worked with a mouse model injecting each type of pathogen into healthy rodents what they noticed was that a certain type of white blood cell cd8+ t lymphocytes which play a key role in the bodys immune response reacted in similar ways both to the viral and to the bacterial pathogen '' we saw a quantitatively identical immune reaction from the lymphocytes called cd8+ t '' says first author nicolas page sheep disease toxin shines a light on multiple sclerosis is there a relationship between sheep disease and ms read now '' however '' he adds `` only the mouse infected with the viral pathogen developed an inflammatory brain disease reminiscent of ms '' this observation led the scientists to examine gene expression in cd8+ t cells to see how it was affected by the viral pathogen they found that the lymphocytes that had reacted to the bacterium expressed a particular dnabinding factor or proteins that help to organize dna tox tox contributes to the development of certain lymphocytes that then mount an immune response in reaction to foreign bodies that are perceived as threatening in this case as page further explains they `` found that the inflammation environment influences the expression of tox in t lymphocytes and that it could play a role in triggering ms '' how does tox lead to ms but how could the team decide whether tox expression was in fact crucial in the development of an autoimmune disease such as ms they thought that a good way of proving its significance was by repressing the dnabinding factor in the cd8+ t cells of healthy mice what the researchers then noticed was in merklers words that `` although they received the viral pathogen the mice did not develop the disease '' normally our brains are well equipped to fend off autoimmune reactions that might damage the neurons and impact the central nervous system '' our brains have a limited regenerative capacity which is why they have to protect themselves against the bodys immune reactions which can destroy its cells by wanting to fight the virus creating irreversible damage '' merkler explains '' the brain then sets up barriers that block the passage of t lymphocytes '' he adds however when tox is activated in cd8+ t lymphocytes it renders the cells unable to receive some of the signals that the brain sends to prevent them from attacking healthy neurons so without this `` memo '' the lymphocytes then mount an autoimmune response that targets the brain cells '' this is an encouraging result for understanding the causes of the disease but there is still lots of work to be done to ascertain what really causes multiple sclerosis in humans '' says page so the next step from here for the research team will be to gain a better understanding of toxs role and to see whether it might be involved in triggering other autoimmune diseases apart from ms as well as certain types of cancerscientists have developed a new vaccine that in conjunction with existing therapies can not only treat aggressive melanoma but also prevent its recurrence have researchers finally found the best vaccine against aggressive melanoma researchers from the scripps research institute in san diego ca recently worked with experts from other institutions to develop a vaccine that would be effective against melanoma a type of skin cancer when administered in conjunction with other therapies according to prof dale boger who coled the research with nobel laureate bruce beutler `` this cotherapy produced a complete response a curative response in the treatment of melanoma '' these promising results are reported in a study paper now published in the journal pnas experimental approach fully successful the researchers tested three different therapy options in a mouse model of aggressive melanoma all of the mice received a type of cancer immunotherapy known as antipdl1 but in addition to this they also received different vaccine variants prof boger and team split the mice into three groups one group had the cancer vaccine another group had the vaccine plus a molecule called diprovocim and the third group had the cancer vaccine and another adjuvant a chemical known as alum melanoma immunotherapy for brain metastases doubles survival researchers register fresh successes for immunotherapy against metastatic melanoma read now diprovocim is an adjuvant compound that boosts therapy by reinforcing the immune response this compound is particularly attractive to researchers developing new therapies because it is easy to synthesize and modify the researchers found that the eight mice that received the vaccine plus diprovocim treatment in addition to the antipdl1 therapy had a 100 percent survival rate over 54 days in comparison the rodents that received the immunotherapy plus the vaccine only did not survive those that received antipdl1 plus the vaccine with alum saw a 25 percent survival rate over the same period '' it was exciting to see the vaccine working simultaneously with a cancer immunotherapy like antipdl1 '' prof boger says vaccine also prevents recurrence this however is not the only reason why the researchers were excited in fact the experimental vaccine has another positive effect namely protecting the body against tumor recurrence '' just as a vaccine can train the body to fight off external pathogens this vaccine trains the immune system to go after the tumor '' says prof boger the scientists found that when they tried to reintroduce melanoma tumors in the mice in the second experimental group `` it wouldnt take '' as prof boger puts it `` the animal is already vaccinated against it '' he explains when they conducted more experiments in the laboratory the researchers were able to establish that diprovocim boosts the immune response by `` prompting '' the immune system to produce tumorinfiltrating leukocytes a type of cell that attacks and eliminates cancer tumors prof boger and team also note that the vaccine plus diprovocim can be delivered quite easily since they do not have to be injected directly into a main cancer tumor in order to be effective instead the injection can be delivered intramuscularly it is given in two doses inoculated within 7 days from each other in the future the researchers want to keep experimenting with this vaccine and confirm whether it would be effective when delivered alongside other types of cancer therapy the two leading scientists involved in the recent study manage tollbridge therapeutics a medical research company that holds the patent for diprovocimyou may have taken ibuprofen today be it to ease a headache or alleviate back pain but there might be more to this common medication than pain relief a new paper suggests that a daily dose of ibuprofen could prevent alzheimers disease researchers say that ibuprofen could ward off alzheimers if taken every day led by dr patrick mcgeer who is the ceo of aurin biotech in canada the study describes how ibuprofen could reduce inflammation caused by an alzheimersrelated peptide the paper was recently published in the journal of alzheimers disease alzheimers disease is the most common form of dementia it is estimated that around 57 million adults in the united states are living with the disease this number is predicted to rise to almost 14 million by 2050 the search continues for the exact causes of alzheimers but a sticky protein called betaamyloid is believed to play a role in the disease betaamyloid can clump together and form `` plaques '' in the brain these plaques will interfere with brain cell communication which can lead to memory loss behavioral changes and many other symptoms characteristic of alzheimers disease in a study published last year dr mcgeer and colleagues revealed that a betaamyloid peptide known as amyloidbeta 42 abeta 42 is present in saliva as well as the brain and that levels of this peptide are higher in adults who are at greater risk of alzheimers based on those results the team suggests that a saliva test could be used to predict the risk of alzheimers disease years before symptoms arise '' what weve learned through our research '' reports dr mcgeer `` is that people who are at risk of developing alzheimers exhibit the same elevated abeta 42 levels as people who already have it moreover they exhibit those elevated levels throughout their lifetime so theoretically they could get tested anytime '' a true breakthrough in their paper the researchers claim that ibuprofen a widely used nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug nsaid could prevent the development of alzheimers in people with high levels of abeta 42 dr mcgeer and team point to previous research that they conducted in which they suggested that abeta 42 triggers an inflammatory response can beets tackle alzheimers at its root a new study finds that a beetderived compound could help to treat alzheimers disease read now this response could be reduced by ibuprofen and other nsaids say the researchers which could stop alzheimers in its tracks the team says that identifying the risk of alzheimers through a saliva test would offer people the opportunity to prevent alzheimers development through a daily dose of ibuprofen '' knowing that the prevalence of clinical alzheimers disease commences at age 65 '' explains dr mcgeer `` we recommend that people get tested 10 years before at age 55 when the onset of alzheimers would typically begin '' '' if they exhibit elevated abeta 42 levels then that is the time to begin taking daily ibuprofen to ward off the disease '' dr patrick mcgeer he hails the saliva test as a `` true breakthrough '' because it `` points in a direction where alzheimers disease can eventually be eliminated '' however dr mcgeers claims have been met with some criticism daily ibuprofen recommendation premature dr doug brown chief policy and research officer at the alzheimers society in the united kingdom believes that it is far too soon to be recommending daily ibuprofen for alzheimers prevention '' population studies '' he says `` which gather large amounts of information from medical records from thousands of people have thrown up an idea that taking ibuprofen and other overthecounter antiinflammatories might be linked to a lower risk of dementia '' '' but results of clinical trials with these drugs have been disappointing so far '' '' the researchers suggestion in this paper that taking a daily antiinflammatory drug as soon as a positive result for dementia risk is shown by a saliva test is premature '' adds dr brown `` based on the evidence at the moment '' he also notes the risks of longterm nsaid use including intestinal bleeding and stomach ulcers nsaids may also interact with other medications such as warfarin and produce harmful effects '' we always recommend talking to your doctor before changing your medication '' dr brown saysdogs often hailed as humans best friends have been the topic of many scientific studies looking into how they might boost our wellbeing in this spotlight well explain how your friendly pup can benefit your health across the board learn just how dogs can contribute to our physical and emotional wellbeing according to the american society for the prevention of cruelty to animals aspca an estimated 78 million dogs are owned as pets in the united states it is unclear when dogs were first domesticated but a study published last year claims that at least in europe dogs were tamed 20000–40000 years ago it is likely that humans and dogs have shared a special bond of friendship and mutual support ever since at least the neolithic period but why has this bond been so longlasting of course these cousins of the wolves have historically been great at keeping us and our dwellings safe guarding our houses our cattle and our various material goods throughout history humans have also trained dogs to assist them with hunting or they have bred numerous quirkylooking species for their cuteness or elegance however dogs are also and might have always been truly valued companions famed for their loyalty and seemingly constant willingness to put a smile on their owners faces in this spotlight we outline the research that shows how our dogs make us happier more resilient when facing stress and physically healthier to name but a few ways in which these muchloved quadrupeds support our wellbeing how dogs keep you in good health many studies have suggested that having dogs as pets is associated with better physical health as reviews of the existing literature show these findings persist dogs force their owners to take daily exercise just last year medical news today reported on a study that showed that owning a dog reduces a persons risk of premature death by up to a third also researchers at the university of harvard in cambridge ma suggest that dog owners have a lower risk of heart disease why is that it is difficult to establish a causal relationship between owning a dog and enjoying better health however the benefits may appear thanks to a series of factors related to lifestyle adjustments that people tend to make after they decide to adopt a canine friend why you should talk to your dog learn how talking to your dog helps you bond read now the most prominent such lifestyle factor is physical activity there is no way around it if you own a dog you have to commit to twice daily walks and sometimes even more according to a paper published in the journal of physical activity and health dog owners are more likely to walk for leisure purposes than both nonpet owners and people who own pet cats the results were based on studying a cohort of 41514 participants from california some of whom owned dogs some of whom owned cats and some of whom did not have any pets moreover several recent studies including one from the university of missouri in columbia and another from glasgow caledonian university in the united kingdom found that adults aged 60 and over enjoy better health thanks to the `` enforced '' exercise they get by walking their dogs '' over the course of a week this additional time spent walking may in itself be sufficient to meet world health organization recommendations of at least 150 minutes of moderate to vigorous physical activity '' philippa dall glasgow caledonian university dogs can strengthen our health not just as we grow older but also much much earlier than that before we are even born research published last year suggests that children who were exposed to dogs while still in the womb as their mothers spent time around dogs during pregnancy had a lower risk of developing eczema in early childhood also children exposed to certain bacteria carried by dogs also experienced a reduction of asthma symptoms the researchers noted dogs make people feel good perhaps the most intuitive benefit of sharing your life and home with a canine friend is that dogs give you `` feelgood vibes '' almost instantly dogs are often used as therapy animals because they have a calming effect on people it is really difficult not to cheer up even after a hard days work when you are greeted with often vocal enthusiasm by a friendly dog this researchers explain is due to the effect of the `` love hormone '' oxytocin '' during the last decades '' write the authors of a review that featured in frontiers in psychology `` animal assistance in therapy education and care has greatly increased '' when we interact with dogs our oxytocin levels shoot up since this is the hormone largely responsible for social bonding this hormonal `` love injection '' boosts our psychological wellbeing previous studies analyzed in the review have revealed that dog owners have more positive social interactions and that the presence of canine friends makes people more trustingand also more deserving of trust moreover dogs appear to reduce symptoms of depression and render people more resilient to stress that is why dogs are often used as therapy animals as researcher brian hare of duke university in durham nc noted in an interview for the washington post '' dogs make people feel good and their only job is to help people in stressful situations feel better '' researchers hypothesize that therapy dogs can improve the psychological wellbeing of children going through cancer therapy as well as help individuals diagnosed with posttraumatic stress disorder ptsd deal with disruptive symptoms or even prevent the onset of ptsd episodes what clinical research in dogs can teach us our canine companions could also give us clues and open new avenues of research when it comes to clinical research concerning our own health problems dogs share many diseases with humans by learning more about them we can also learn more about ourselves a study that mnt covered earlier this year reveals that dogs share certain metabolic conditions such as obesity with their human owners thus learning more about dogs gut microbiota and how they are affected by diet could help us understand how best to tackle our own eating habits like humans dogs can also develop some forms of cancer much like us dogs can get brain tumors to similarly destructive effect so learning which genes predispose our canine companions to gliomas may also be translated into cancer research for human patients moreover a contagious form of canine cancer could shed light into how forms of cancer found in humans have come to develop dogs can also experience certain features characteristic of dementia such as impaired problemsolving abilities researchers explain that by understanding how cognitive tasks are affected in these quadrupeds we may become better equipped to solve the riddle of dementia in the case of humans too '' dogs '' notes dr rosalind arden of the london school of economics and political science in the uk `` are one of the few animals that reproduce many of the key features of dementia '' '' so '' she goes on to add `` understanding their cognitive abilities could be valuable in helping us to understand the causes of this disorder in humans and possibly test treatments for it '' dogs are not just incredibly loveable and often very funny friends whose antics fuel the internets store of memes continuously their company also keeps us in good physical shape also their health problems sadly but endearingly often mirror our own most of all however we welcome them into our lives and have done so since time immemorial because they instantly bring us the sort of joy and calm that we would otherwise have to work hard to obtain author dean koontz summarized this perfectly in his memoir of his own muchloved dog '' one of the greatest gifts we receive from dogs is the tenderness they evoke in us by their delight in being with us the reliable sunniness of their disposition the joy they bring to playtime the curiosity with which they embrace each new experience dogs can melt cynicism and sweeten the bitter heart '' we picked linked items based on the quality of products and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you we partner with some of the companies that sell these products which means healthline uk and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a links abovenew research warns that a number of weight loss and workout supplements contain without accurately listing potentially harmful doses of a substance that has been ruled as unsafe a range of dietary supplements contain a substance that may harm you recently scientists looked into whether a range of supplements used as weight loss or workout aids may actually be harmful to those who take them the world antidoping agency wada ban all athletes from taking any drugs or supplements that include higenamine a beta2 agonist that may have toxic effects on the heart yet despite the fact that higenamine is banned by the wada and that it might be harmful to peoples cardiovascular health many dietary supplements still contain it as a substance that naturally occurs in certain plants such as aconite the researchers including john travis a senior research scientist at nsf international in ann arbor mi have revealed not only that higenamine is a widely used supplement ingredient but also that companies that produce such supplements do not properly list the dosage at which this ingredient is used '' were urging competitive and amateur athletes as well as general consumers to think twice before consuming a product that contains higenamine '' says travis '' beyond the doping risk for athletes '' he adds `` some of these products contain extremely high doses of a stimulant with unknown safety and potential cardiovascular risks when consumed '' '' what weve learned from the study is that there is often no way for a consumer to know how much higenamine is actually in the product they are taking '' john travis these findings now appear in the journal clinical toxicology concerning levels of harmful substance the researchers analyzed 24 supplements for weight loss or preworkout that listed higenamine also known as norcoclaurine and demethylcoclaurine and noticed that they featured widely varying and unreliable amounts of this substance the 24 products tested in the study were adrenal pump apidren betastim burnhc defcon1 second strike diablo dyno gnar pump higenamine high definition hypermax iburn2 liporidex max liporidex plus liporush ds2 no vate oxyshred prostunadvanced thermogenic pyroxamine razor8 ritual preworkout supplement stim shot thermovate and uplift probiotics does the evidence match the hype are probiotics really good for you read now worryingly of all the supplements that the researchers looked at only five products mentioned an exact quantity of higenamine however when the supplements were tested travis and his colleagues found that the listed quantities were incorrect actual quantities of higenamine across the range of products included anything from trace amounts to 62 milligrams per serving however based on the label instructions users may actually take up to 110 milligrams of the substance per day which may harm their health in unpredictable ways '' some plants such as ephedra contain stimulants if you take too much of the stimulants found in ephedra it can have lifethreatening consequences '' explains study coauthor dr pieter cohen '' similarly '' he adds `` higenamine is a stimulant found in plants when it comes to higenamine we dont yet know for certain what effect high dosages will have in the human body but a series of preliminary studies suggest that it might have profound effects on the heart and other organs '' according to a study published in the new england journal of medicine in 2015 about 23005 emergency department visits in the united states are related to supplement intake `` while higenamine is considered a legal dietary ingredient when present as a constituent of botanicals our research identified concerning levels of the stimulant and wildly inaccurate labeling and dosage information '' travis explains '' and as a wadaprohibited substance '' he continues `` any amount of higenamine in a dietary supplement should be of concern to the competitive athlete '' the study concludes that to better protect consumers the food and drug administration fda should now finalize their guidelines on supplement ingredients it also warns doctors that the higenamine quantities in many dietary supplements may impact cardiovascular healthblueberries are sometimes branded a `` superfood '' and for good reason they are packed full of antioxidants that offer a wealth of health benefits now a new study has uncovered another use for these little berries helping to treat cancer blueberry extract could help in the fight against cancer say researchers by studying human cervical cancer cell lines a team of researchers discovered that adding blueberry extract to radiation therapy can significantly improve treatment efficacy lead study author dr yujiang fang who works in the school of medicine at the university of missouricolumbia and colleagues recently reported their results in pathology and oncology research according to the american cancer society acs around 12820 new cases of cervical cancer will be diagnosed in the united states this year and more than 4200 women are expected to die from the disease radiation therapy remains a primary treatment for cervical cancer it involves using highenergy radiation to destroy cancer cells '' for some cancers such as late stage cervical cancer radiation is a good treatment option '' says dr fang `` however collateral damage to healthy cells always occurs '' for their study the researchers set out to determine whether or not blueberry extract could be used as a radiosensitizer which is a compound that makes cancer cells more vulnerable to radiation therapy the researchers explain that the blueberry extract does not only make cancer cells more sensitive to radiation but it also reduces the abnormal cell growth that fuels cancer development '' cancer cells avoid death by remodeling themselves '' continues dr fang `` along with reducing cell proliferation the extract also tricks cancer cells into dying so it inhibits the birth and promotes the death of cancer cells '' while further studies are needed the researchers say that their findings indicate that blueberries may be a promising treatment strategy for cervical cancer and other cancer types '' blueberries are very common and found all over the world they are readily accessible and inexpensive as a natural treatment option for boosting the effectiveness of existing therapies i feel they would be enthusiastically accepted '' dr yujiang fangdo you want to improve your mind in 2018 we have compiled the best methods to boost brain power improve memory build new neural connections ignite learning and enhance cognitive function if you would like to improve your mind in 2018 we have five tips to help you humans have brain plasticity or neuroplasticity which is the ability of the brain to change for better or worse at any age this flexibility of the brain plays a significant role in the development or decline of our brains and how our distinct personalities are shaped neural connections can be forged or severed and gray matter can thicken or shrink these changes reflect transformations in our abilities for example learning a new skill can wire new neural pathways in our brains while aging may weaken certain neural pathways that once existed and result in our memories not performing as well as they once did the american heart associationamerican stroke association have recently developed seven steps that aim to help individuals keep their brains healthy from childhood into old age they advise people to get regular exercise eat a healthful diet maintain a healthy weight control cholesterol regulate blood sugar levels manage blood pressure quit smoking in addition to following these guidelines medical news today provide five steps to reach optimal brain health and improve your mind for the year ahead 1 get physically active from childhood through adulthood and into old age physical activity has been shown time and time again to benefit brain health taking a brisk walk before an exam or test could enhance your performance physical activity affects childrens brain structure from an early age which in turn affects their academic performance researchers discovered that children who are physically fit tend to have more gray matter in the frontal subcortical and temporal brain regions as well as in the calcarine cortex these areas are all essential for executive function and motor learning and visual processes exercise has been demonstrated to improve memory and thinking ability among older adults with mild cognitive impairment aerobic exercise in particular was shown to increase brain volume in most gray matter regions including those that support shortterm memory and improve cognitive function scientists have indicated that even short bouts of physical activity may have a positive effect on the brain taking part in 20 minutes of highintensity interval training for 6 weeks has been associated with improvements in highinterference memory which allows us to differentiate between our car and one of the same make model and color for example the research also found that levels of brainderived neurotrophic factor a protein involved in the function growth and survival of brain cells was greater in individuals who experienced greater fitness gains from interval training other research revealed that a onetime 10minute burst of exercise temporarily boosts areas of the brain responsible for focus decisionmaking and problemsolving this suggests that right before a cognitively demanding task such as an exam test or interview performance may be improved by a brisk walk or cycle and if you happen to prefer a more gentle form of exercise practicing 25 minutes of hatha yoga or mindfulness meditation each day has been associated with improvements in the brains executive functions and cognitive abilities as well as the ability to regulate kneejerk emotional responses 2 eat a brainboosting mediterranean diet the mediterranean is the home to sun sea and foods known to have brainboosting properties eating pistachios could improve cognitive processing and learning the mediterranean diet is rich in vegetables fruits whole grains beans nuts seeds and olive oil it also includes moderate amounts of dairy fish and wine while red meat poultry and processed foods are limited research discovered that people who follow a mediterranean diet might have longterm brain protection study participants who consumed a mediterranean diet retained more brain volume over 3 years than those not following the diet eating a mediterranean diet has also been shown to slow down the rate of cognitive decline and is linked with improved brain function in older adults a study that focused on the impact of eating nuts on the brain found that regular nut consumption strengthens brainwave frequencies that are related to cognition learning memory healing and other vital brain functions cognitive ability genes identified this study uncovered 70 new genes related to cognitive ability read now the research team tested almonds cashews pecans pistachios and walnuts although peanuts are actually legumes they were still included in the study some types of nut were found to stimulate specific brain frequencies more than others pistachios seemed to generate the highest gamma wave response while peanuts produced the most significant delta response gamma wave response is tied to information retention learning cognitive processing and perception and delta wave response is linked to natural healing and healthy immunity 3 expand cognitive abilities with training brain training has had mixed results in studies while some research has shown that brain training improves memory and cognitive ability other studies report that there is little evidence to support claims that braintraining programs improve everyday cognitive performance mastering the memory of loci training method could expand your memory capacity recent papers have determined that the type of brain exercise is an important factor in the outcome of braintraining sessions research that was led by radboud university medical center in nijmegen the netherlands found that not only is supersized memory ability trainable but it is also longlasting individuals with typical memory skills used a strategic memory improvement technique known as memory of loci training for 30 minutes each day for 40 days the participants went from recalling around 26 words from a list of 72 to remembering 62 words so the training more than doubled their memory capacity improvements in recall were observed for at least 4 months after training the memory of loci is a mnemonic device that uses familiar objects in a room or landmarks on a journey to visualize memorize and recall an unlimited amount of information in a fixed order 4 learn a new language in addition to brain training another method you can use to give your brain a workout is to learn a new language or several foreign languages learning foreign languages ignites cognitive abilities in infants benefits the aging brain and sharpens the mind learn one or many foreign languages to slow down cognitive decline researchers at the higher school of economics in moscow russia as well as the university of helsinki in finland report that learning foreign languages enhances the elasticity of the brain and its capacity to code information they explain that the more languages a person learns the faster their neural network reacts to process the accumulated data other research which was led by the university of edinburgh in the united kingdom revealed that speaking two or more languages might slow down the cognitive decline associated with aging even if the other languages are learned during adulthood 5 study a musical instrument regardless of whether you study a musical instrument during childhood or adulthood unleashing your inner mozart will have a beneficial effect on your brain studying a musical instrument helps to protect the brain exposure to music at a young age contributes to improved brain development establishes neural networks and stimulates existing tracts in the brain receiving musical training as a child has been demonstrated to prevent the deterioration of speech listening skills in later years and may ward off agerelated cognitive decline a study that was published in the journal of neuroscience uncovered the reason why playing a musical instrument might have a protective effect on the brain the scientists found that playing sounds on an instrument changes brain waves in such a way that rapidly improves listening and hearing skills the altered brain activity illustrates that the brain can rewire itself and compensate for disease or injuries that may get in the way of a persons ability to perform tasks learning a physical task with music has also been shown to increase structural connectivity between the areas of the brain that are responsible for processing sounds and controlling movement adding just a few of these activities to your weekly schedule will enhance your mind and give your brain a boost if you only have time to fit one brainenriching task into your week we recommend getting out for a brisk walk physical activity has no end of benefits for your body and mindcoconut oil has been all the rage for some time endorsed by a number of celebrities as a superfood this tropicalsmelling fat often liberally applied to our skin and scalps is a favorite of many but the question remains is it healthful or not are the health claims that adorn coconut oil based on fact or fiction fat suffered a bad reputation for a long time and we were told to opt for lowfat options instead but the tides turned eventually prompting us to see fats in a new light our lives became simpler we learned how to avoid bad saturated and hydrogenated fats and eat good unsaturated ones to keep our tickers and arteries healthy then the humble coconut came along in 2003 and the waters were once again muddied seen by some as a superfood but recently labeled by the american heart association aha as part of the pool of unhealthful fats the controversy goes on so what are the scientific facts behind the coconut oil hype and what are the latest developments secret ingredient mediumchain fatty acids many of the purported health claims surrounding coconut oil stem from research published in 2003 by mariepierre stonge phd a professor of nutritional medicine at columbia university in new york city ny prof stonge found that in overweight women consumption of mediumchain fatty acids such as those found in coconut oil led to an increase in energy expenditure and fat oxidation compared with women who ate longchain or saturated fatty acids but prof stonge used a specially formulated fat diet in her study not coconut oil and she never claimed that coconut oil was the secret to the results seen in her research the rumor mill had begun to spin and coconut oil became widely hailed as a superfood in fact a 2009 study involving 40 women showed that 30 milliliters of coconut oil consumed daily for a 12week period increased good highdensity lipoprotein hdl levels accompanied by a reduction in waist circumference as more studies have followed the picture became less clearcut aha and who advise to limit consumption despite the number of studies casting coconut oil in a favorable light the aha issued an advisory note on dietary fats and cardiovascular disease in june 2017 recommending that we replace saturated fats with more healthful unsaturated fats this includes coconut oil as the world health organization who state `` unsaturated fats eg found in fish avocado nuts sunflower canola and olive oils are preferable to saturated fats eg found in fatty meat butter palm and coconut oil cream cheese ghee and lard '' the reason saturated fat is bad for our cardiovascular health however there is another twist to this fascinating tale coconut oil for sunburn does it work could sunburn be relieved using coconut oil read now while lowdensity lipoprotein ldl is generally thought of as `` bad '' cholesterol the hdl type is widely accepted as being its `` healthful '' counterpart yet in 2017 we covered three studies that potentially turn what we know about fats and cholesterol on its head the first strudy found that saturated fats may not `` clog '' our arteries after all while the second one uncovered a link between `` good '' hdl and mortality the third study published in november 2017 showed that high levels of hdl may not protect us from heart disease as previously thought what is the latest one of the problems with the controversy surrounding coconut oil is the lack of goodquality largescale human studies but adding to the body of evidence is a new study by the bbcs `` trust me im a doctor '' team together with dr kaytee khaw a professor of clinical gerontology and dr nita gandhi forouhi a professor of population health and nutrition both at the university of cambridge in the united kingdom the team compared the effects of coconut oil olive oil and butter in 94 human volunteers each study participant was asked to consume 50 grams of one of these fats daily for 4 weeks the results came as a surprise those who consumed coconut oil saw a 15 percent increase in hdl levels while this number only stood at 5 percent for olive oil which is accepted as being good for our cardiovascular system if we are working on the premise that hdl is good then these results speak in favor of coconut oil it is important to note however that the results of this study have not been peerreviewed and must be treated as preliminary coconut oil the verdict so is coconut oil healthful or not as with many research areas there is no straightforward answer if you are looking to lose weight its worth bearing in mind that coconut oil is very high in saturated fat and one tablespoon contains 120 calories if its cardiovascular health that you are after the official party line drawn by the aha and who still puts coconut oil on the list of fats to limit but who knows maybe the tables will turn and new guidelines will emerge in the meantime coconut oil can be part of a healthful balanced diet if consumed in moderation however its worth looking out for coconut oil in packaged foods especially partially hydrogenated coconut oil this is a source of trans fats which the food and drug administration fda say increase the risk of heart diseasegroundbreaking research shows for the first time how the most wellknown genetic risk factor for alzheimers disease causes signs in human brain cells also the scientists managed to correct the gene and erase its harmful effects scientists fix the faulty gene that most likely causes alzheimers the complex role of the apolipoprotein apoe gene in the development of alzheimers has been studied extensively for instance researchers know that having one copy of the apoe4 gene variant raises the risk of alzheimers by two to three times and having two copies of this genetic variant puts people at a 12fold higher risk normally apoes role is to provide instructions for creating the protein of the same name in combination with fats apoe creates lipoproteins which help to transport and regulate levels of cholesterol throughout our bloodstream however the e4 version of the gene seems to be particularly damaging to the brain with several studies showing that this genetic variant increases the risk of toxic amyloid beta and tau buildup but why is that what makes the e4 variant of this gene so much more harmful than other variants researchers at the gladstone institutes in san francisco ca wanted to find out their findings have just been published in the journal nature medicine apoe4 studied in human cells for first time more specifically the researchers wanted to locate and understand the fine yet crucial difference between the e3 and e4 variants that makes the apoe4 gene so devastating is it a case the researchers wondered of the e4 variant making apoe3 lose some of its functions or is it the case that more apoe4 has toxic effects alzheimers this antibody may halt brain injury apoetargeting antibodies halved the amount of toxic plaques in mices brains read now lead investigator dr yadong huang a professor of neurology and pathology at the university of california san francisco explains the importance of this question '' its fundamentally important '' he says `` to address this question because it changes how you treat the problem if the damage is caused due to the loss of a proteins function you would want to increase protein levels to supplement those functions '' '' but if the accumulation of a protein leads to a toxic function you want to lower production of the protein to block its detrimental effect '' to find out the researchers modeled the disease in human cells examining the effect of apoe4 on human brain cells for the first time dr huang explains why changing the disease model was in itself a huge step for alzheimers research '' many drugs '' he explains `` work beautifully in a mouse model but so far theyve all failed in clinical trials one concern within the field has been how poorly these mouse models really mimic human disease '' of mice and humans study finds differences applying stem cell technology to skin cells from people with alzheimers who had two copies of the apoe4 gene dr huang and his team created neurons the researchers also created brain cells using skin cells from people who didnt have alzheimers and had two copies of the apoe3 gene the scientists found that in human brain cells the apoe4 protein has a `` pathogenic conformation '' meaning that it has an abnormal form that prevents it from functioning properly leading to a series of diseasecausing problems namely `` apoe4expressing neurons had higher levels of tau phosphorylation '' the authors write which was `` unrelated to their increased production of amyloidbeta peptides and they displayed gabaergic neuron degeneration '' importantly they also found that `` apoe4 increased amyloidbeta production in human but not in mouse neurons '' '' theres an important species difference in the effect of apoe4 on amyloid beta '' explains first study author chengzhong wang '' increased amyloid beta production is not seen in mouse neurons and could potentially explain some of the discrepancies between mice and humans regarding drug efficacy this will be very important information for future drug development '' chengzhong wang correcting the faulty gene next dr huang and team wanted to see whether it was the loss of apoe3 or the accumulation of apoe4 that caused the disease so they compared neurons that did not produce either the e3 or the e4 variant of the protein with cells that had apoe4 added to them the former continued to behave normally while adding apoe4 led to alzheimerslike pathologies this confirmed the fact that it is the presence of the apoe4 that causes the disease as a final step dr huang and his team looked for ways in which to fix the faulty gene to this end they applied a previously developed apoe4 `` structure corrector '' the socalled structure corrector has been shown in previous research led by the same dr huang to change the structure of apoe4 so that it looks and behaves more like the inoffensive apoe3 applying this compound to human apoe4 neurons corrected the defects thereby eliminating signs of the disease restoring normal cell function and helping the cells to live longer the researchers conclude '' treatment of apoe4expressing neurons with a smallmolecule structure corrector ameliorated the detrimental effects thus showing that correcting the pathogenic conformation of apoe4 is a viable therapeutic approach for apoe4related alzheimers disease ''you wake up in the middle of the night convinced that an evil figure is lying in wait you attempt to move but your body just will not budge you try to scream but nothing comes out the monster draws closer it may sound like a horror movie scene but this is the real deal youre experiencing sleep paralysis sleep paralysis is like a waking nightmare and the underlying causes for this condition remain unclear this terrifying and mysterious sleep disorder or parasomnia has been experienced by people possibly since the dawn of humankind and it may have given rise to numerous ghost stories and mysterious accounts involving `` things that go bump in the night '' this most unsettling experience was first clearly documented in a medical treatise in the 17th century by dutch physician isbrand van diembroeck who wrote about the case of a woman `` 50 years of age in good plight health strong '' yet who complained of mysterious experiences at night '' when she was composing her self to sleep '' explains van diembroeck `` sometimes she believed the devil lay upon her and held her down sometimes that she was choked by a great dog or thief lying upon her breast so that she could hardly speak or breathe and when she endeavored to throw off the burden she was not able to stir her members '' what the woman in van dimbroecks account likely experienced was a condition that has come to be known as `` sleep paralysis '' researchers define it as `` a common generally benign parasomnia characterized by brief episodes of inability to move or speak combined with waking consciousness '' sleep paralysis and hallucinations the reason why sleep paralysis is so scary is not just because you will suddenly become alert but realize that you are in fact unable to move a muscle or utter a sound but also because this experience is often as in the case above accompanied by terrifying hallucinations these as specialized literature has now ascertained typically fall into three distinct categories a sensed presence or intruder hallucinations in which the person feels the presence of an evil threatening individual incubus hallucinations in which the person might feel someone or something pressing down uncomfortably even painfully on their chest or abdomen or trying to choke them vestibularmotor hallucinations during which the individual thinks that they are floating flying or moving these may also sometimes include outofbody experiences in which a person thinks that their spirit or mind has left their body and is moving and observing events from above among the types of dreamlike hallucinations listed above the first type a sensed presence is one of the most commonly experienced by people with sleep paralysis as for the time of sleep at which sleep paralysis with or without hallucinations normally takes place again there is no single answer according to a study that was published in the journal of sleep research sleep paralysis typically happens soon after falling asleep or hypnagogic episodes at some point during the course of sleep or hypnomesic episodes or a little before the persons usual time of awakening or hypnopompic episodes the authors of that study note that the most common instances of sleep paralysis are hypnomesic and that they usually take place after 1–3 hours from falling asleep a strange shadowy man in fact these visions and sensations can seem so realistic to many people that they may think that they are having a paranormal experience or even being subjected to strange tests and rituals the most common hallucination linked to sleep paralysis is the sensed presence of a sinister figure '' witness accounts '' of such hallucinations can be truly unsettling and a number of longtime experients such as louid proud in his book dark intrusions have offered detailed accounts of years of uncanny nightly encounters one person who told me about his nightmarish hallucinations said he felt as if `` someone knelt on his chest so that it felt as if he was being choked out '' another person spoke of a nighttime assailant that takes pleasure in tormenting her in myriad ways '' when sleep paralysis strikes i get both visual and auditory hallucinations which most often involve a strange shadowy man coming up my stairs and into my bedroom occasionally hell prod or tickle me '' often she told me this sinister figure even `` coopts '' her partner in his mischief '' sometimes '' she says `` ill even hallucinate my partner lying next to me and laughing maliciously at me or siding with the shadowy figure in annoying me this is very frustrating since all i want him to do is help me '' given the intensity of these hallucinatory experiences it may come as no surprise that researchers have repeatedly argued that hallucinations linked with sleep paralysis can be held responsible for many reports of magical events sightings of ghouls and demons and alien abductions some happy exceptions although usually people with sleep paralysis report experiencing terrifying hallucinations a happy few actually point to a state of bliss that makes them look forward to these episodes a study that was conducted by james allan cheyne from the university of waterloo in ontario canada suggests that the people who most often describe experiencing positive feelings and sensations during an episode of sleep paralysis are those who are prone to vestibularmotor hallucinations '' these hallucinations were found to involve feelings of floating and outofbody experiences which are associated with feelings of bliss rather than fear '' james allan cheyne '' in contrast to the otheroriented nature of the intruder and incubus hallucinations '' he adds `` these experiences are very much focused on the experients own person '' sometimes cheyne continues feelings of bliss during sleep paralysis are derived from pleasant erotic sensations that arise from vestibularmotor hallucinations what is the underlying mechanism so what happens in the body during an episode of sleep paralysis essentially during the dream phase of sleep known as the rapid eye movement rem phase our skeletal muscles are paralyzed the reasons behind this are not fully understood though researchers have been making progress in uncovering the mechanisms attached to this process insomnia why your brain may sleep without even knowing it people who have insomnia may actually fall asleep for short stretches of time without realizing it how come they dont know it happens read now one popular theory posits that this temporary state of paralysis is meant to prevent us from hurting ourselves perhaps in automatic response to some violent dream during sleep paralysis paradoxically our brains or parts of our brains become awake and conscious but the rest of the body is still immobilized at the same time during sleep paralysis many people experience dream visions and sensations as though they were real hence the hallucinations and the fact that they are in fact partly awake and conscious blurs the line between reality and dreams who is at risk of sleep paralysis sleep paralysis is more common than we may think a 2016 study declares that it is `` surprisingly common '' but that `` determining accurate prevalence rates is complicated '' because researchers and study participants alike have different understandings of what counts as sleep paralysis although a fair amount of research has been conducted in this respect it remais unclear as to who is most at risk of sleep paralysis a recent review of the available data however suggests that 76 percent of the population have experienced at least one episode throughout their lives that said the numbers may be even higher what causes sleep paralysis and what the main risks are for experiencing such an episode remain largely mysterious sleep paralysis is a common symptom of the neurological disorder `` narcolepsy '' which is characterized by uncontrollable sleepiness throughout the waking day but many people who experience sleep paralysis do so independently of neurological conditions and to distinguish between narcolepsyrelated episodes and independently occurring sleep paralysis specialists usually refer to the latter as `` isolated sleep paralysis '' recurrent isolated sleep paralysis often starts in adolescence and around 283 percent of students apparently experience it moreover people with poor `` sleep hygiene '' for instance those who sleep too much or too little may also be more likely to experience sleep paralysis the authors of a systematic review published in sleep medicine reviews note '' specifically excessively short fewer than 6 hours or long over 9 hours sleep duration and napping especially long naps over 2 hours were associated with increased odds of sleep paralysis '' '' long selfreported sleep latency how long it takes to fall asleep over 30 minutes and difficulty initiating sleep were related to an increased likelihood of reporting sleep paralysis '' they add are mental health issues to blame given the frightening nature of the most of the hallucinations associated with sleep paralysis many have wondered whether individuals experiencing mental health issues such as depression or anxiety are more susceptible to these experiences the results of existing research however are mixed some have argued that individuals who have experienced abuse in early life whether or not they remember it may be more exposed to sleep paralysis according to the study that was published in sleep medicine reviews `` levels of waking state dissociative experiences involving depersonalisation derealisation and amnesia were found to be related to both sleep paralysis frequency and the frequencyintensity of all three hallucination types '' but links to other neurological and psychiatric disorders are more uncertain the authors of a study that was published in the journal consciousness and cognition note that previous research has tried to make a case that bipolar disorder posttraumatic stress disorder depression panic disorder and generalized anxiety disorder to name but a few may play a role in sleep paralysis however they report that their analysis of the available data has revealed `` no general relationship between isolated sleep paralysis and major psychopathology '' instead they decided to focus on the most common `` symptom '' of sleep paralysis that is sensed presence hallucinations that induce a feeling of fear and explained that there may be a link between it and what they call `` passive social imagery '' passive social imagery refers to the experience of individuals who are prone to being more socially anxious and to imagining themselves in embarrassing or distressing social situations as the passive victim on the receiving end of abuse these individuals the researchers suggest appear to be more at risk of experiencing distress due to sensed presence hallucinations what can you do to prevent it prevention and coping strategies for sleep paralysis are unfortunately mostly anecdotal but there are some methods that seem to have been repeatedly validated by many individuals who say that they usually or often work for them these include trying not to fall asleep on on your back since studies have associated episodes of sleep paralysis with lying on ones back when going to sleep trying to ensure on a regular basis that your sleep will not be disrupted since repeatedly waking up during the night has been flagged up as a potential risk factor avoiding overuse of stimulants such as tobacco and alcohol coffee surprisingly has not been deemed risky in this context though the evidence that these affect the chances of experiencing sleep paralysis is mixed learning meditation and muscle relaxation techniques may help you to better cope with the experience persisting in the attempt `` to move extremities '' such as fingers or toes during sleep paralysis also seems to help disrupt the experience finally if you regularly experience sleep paralysis with `` sensed presence '' and you think that this may be related to other experiences of anxiety in your daytoday life then it may be worth considering cognitive behavioral therapy according to the authors of the consciousness and cognition study there is a distinct `` possibility that frightening isolated sleep paralysis sensed presence experiences may contribute to maintenance of an individuals negative social imagery biases '' if that is the case they argue `` cognitive behavioral treatment of these experiences could help to alleviate the more general social imagery dysfunction '' which may improve the overall situation we picked linked items based on the quality of products and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you we partner with some of the companies that sell these products which means healthline uk and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a links aboveboth swine flu and bird flu created a stir in recent years now a new threat may be on the horizon a new study demonstrates that the influenza virus can jump from pigs to canines canine influenza viruses are growing in number usually influenza pandemics are sparked when a virus jumps from birds to pigs and then eventually to humans influenza viruses in an animal population where there are many viral strains in one place can mix together to create new forms when new strains jump to humans our immune systems which have no experience of these unknown pathogens fail to protect us for instance the 2009 h1n1 pandemic was caused by a virus that began in birds then it moved into pigs where it picked up new genes from flu viruses already present in swine before leaping into humans generally birds and swine are considered the most dangerous melting pots for the influenza virus viruses in dogs and horses seem to have much less viral genetic diversity influenza and dogs although much less common 15 years ago researchers documented an influenza virus that had entered a horse before jumping into a canine this became the first circulating canine influenza virus then just 5 years ago a canine influenza virus of avian origin was discovered in farmed dogs in china a new study published this week in the journal mbio moves the story on another step how to avoid catching the flu although complete immunity cant be guaranteed here are some tips that might protect you from getting sick read now the scientists who are based at the center for research on influenza pathogenesis icahn school of medicine at mount sinai in new york city ny looked in detail at the genomes of 16 influenza viruses from dogs in southern chinas guangxi autonomous region the viruses were detected in dogs that attended veterinary clinics due to respiratory problems the authors explain their findings and their importance '' what we have found is another set of viruses that come from swine that are originally avian in origin and now they are jumping into dogs and have been reassorted with other viruses in dogs '' '' we now have h1n1 h3n2 and h3n8 in dogs they are starting to interact with each other this is very reminiscent of what happened in swine 10 years before the h1n1 pandemic '' next steps and new concerns this new virus that the researchers found is h1n1 but it is distinct from the strain that caused the previous epidemic to the next step will be to test the virus on human serum '' if there is a lot of immunity against these viruses '' says investigator dr adolfo garcíasastre `` they will represent less of a risk but we now have one more host in which influenza virus is starting to have a diverse genotypic and phenotypic characteristics creating diversity in a host which is in very close contact to humans '' it may be that humans already have protection against this particular strain but that does not take the concern away entirely '' the diversity in dogs has increased so much now that the type of combinations of viruses that can be created in dogs represent potential risk for a virus to jump to a dog into a human '' dr adolfo garcíasastre in the united states whenever avian flu is detected in a population of birds they are culled this would be an unpopular solution if the virus was to infect domestic dogs dr garcíasastre says `` there are attempts to restrict influenza virus in pigs through vaccination and one could consider vaccination for dogs '' hopefully interventions of that nature wont be necessary but only time will tell whether dog flu could become a serious reason for concernscientists in the united kingdom and china find that a new drug for type 2 diabetes may protect the brain from damage caused by alzheimers disease after testing it in mice could a diabetes drug help to treat alzheimers disease in a new paper published in the journal brain research the researchers explain how the `` tripleaction '' drug resulted in a significant reversal of memory loss in mice that were genetically engineered to develop humanlike alzheimers disease the new drug `` holds clear promise of being developed into a new treatment for chronic neurodegenerative disorders such as alzheimers disease '' says study leader christian hölscher a professor in the faculty of health and medicine at lancaster university in the uk alzheimers is a brainwasting disease that accounts for 50–75 percent of cases of dementia which is a condition wherein people gradually lose their ability to think remember make decisions hold a conversation and look after themselves as the disease progresses the brain undergoes biological and chemical changes and particular areas shrink as nerve cells or neurons die the exact causes of alzheimers are currently unknown but microscopic examinations of affected brain tissue have revealed two hallmarks abnormal accumulations of protein segments known as `` plaques '' and `` tangles '' current treatments make no real difference the number of people with alzheimers disease is rising rapidly as the population ages in 2015 there were an estimated 468 million people worldwide living with dementia and this number is expected to reach more than 130 million in 2050 in the united states where alzheimers is currently the sixth leading cause of death there are an estimated 5 million people living with alzheimers disease this is expected to rise to 16 million by 2050 accompanied by a significant rise in costs to the us the cost of alzheimers and other causes of dementia in 2017 was estimated to be $ 259 billion and is expected to rise to $ 11 trillion by 2050 at present there is no cure for alzheimers disease and there are also no treatments that make a significant difference to the symptoms drug raises activity of three growth factors type 2 diabetes is a disease that results from insulin resistance a condition in which cells become less sensitive to insulin and therefore less able to take in glucose from the bloodstream to use as energy the pancreas makes more insulin to compensate but eventually it will be unable to keep up and blood glucose levels will rise leading to prediabetes diabetes and other health problems could an existing oxygen therapy treat alzheimers learn how hyperbaric oxygen therapy might alleviate some physical and behavioral symptoms of alzheimers read now the drug that prof hölscher and his group tested in the new study is a `` triple receptor agonist '' that activates the proteins that allow signals from three growth factors called glucagonlike peptide1 glucosedependent insulinotropic polypeptide and glucagon to enter cells previous studies have revealed that type 2 diabetes is a risk factor for alzheimers and problems with growth factor signaling have been detected in the brains of people with the disease the new study is the first to show that a triple receptor agonist may protect the brain from the progressive brain damage that occurs in alzheimers disease consistent neuroprotective effects the researchers tested the drug on aged appps1 mice whose brains were in the advanced stages of degeneration appps1 mice are engineered `` transgenic mice '' that carry versions of human genes that are linked to an inherited form of alzheimers in a maze learning test the treated mice showed improved memory formation also examination of their brain tissue showed a reduction in amyloid plaques inflammation and oxidative stress treated mice showed higher rates of new nerve cell generation and celltocell connections and increased levels of a growth factor called brainderived neurotrophic factor which protects nerve cells '' these very promising outcomes '' says prof hölscher `` demonstrate the efficacy of these novel multiplereceptor drugs that originally were developed to treat type 2 diabetes but have shown consistent neuroprotective effects in several studies '' he notes that clinical studies that used an older version of the same type of drug have already shown `` very promising results in people with alzheimers disease or with mood disorders '' the researchers believe that their findings point to a `` promising '' direction in which to look for new treatments for alzheimers disease '' here we show that a novel triple receptor drug shows promise as a potential treatment for alzheimers but further doseresponse tests and direct comparisons with other drugs have to be conducted in order to evaluate if this new drug is superior to previous ones '' prof christian hölscheranhedonia or the inability to feel pleasure during pleasurable activities occurs as a part of a number of conditions it is also considered a central feature of depression in this spotlight feature we explore whats happening in the brain anhedonia accompanies a range of neuropsychiatric conditions most people will at some point in their life lose interest in things that used to excite them anhedonia however takes this loss to its limits it becomes impossible to draw enjoyment from things that once elicited excitement such as music sex food and conversation aside from major depressive disorder it can occur as part of other conditions including schizophrenia psychosis and parkinsons disease as well as anorexia nervosa and substance abuse disorders it may even play a part in an individuals desire to indulge in risky behaviors such as skydiving over recent years anhedonia has received increased attention part of the reason for this is that it predicts how well someone with depression will respond to treatment common antidepressants tend to work less well for people who have depression with anhedonia than for those who have depression without anhedonia because treating depression is so challenging any additional insight is welcome there is evidence to suggest that the presence of anhedonia increases the risk of committing suicide so if the link is proven recognizing and dealing with anhedonia could save lives what does anhedonia feel like to gain a better understanding of what anhedonia feels like the following is an excerpt from a firsthand account '' for the past 7 years i have had the smallest flickering of emotions what i feel on a daily basis is practically nil i have no desires to truly speak of as nothing i do is rewarding or satisfying this is the core of my anhedonia a symptom of major depression '' '' essentially i gain nothing from my daily life my world is cold and as such it makes life seem the same way everything i look at everything i do looks and feels the same '' whats happening in the brain as with the investigation of any emotional response the story is not a simple one the brains circuitry is dense convoluted and incredibly busy anhedonia is not simply a reduced appreciation of the taste of chocolate the underlying reward mechanisms are impaired this might involve alterations in levels of interest motivation anticipation expectation and effort prediction all of which are complex in their own right and all of which are processed by different but overlapping neural circuits anhedonia and reward there is evidence that many individuals with anhedonia can experience pleasure in a similar way to the rest of the population its just that there is something amiss as far as motivation anticipation and reward are concerned anhedonia seems to interfere with reward mechanisms for people with anhedonia the reward process has come unhinged finding which part of this process has become unshackled is a difficult job in order to understand the interplay between the different aspects of pleasure i will relay an example if we experience something and enjoy it eating a new type of candy for instance we might want to do it again however if the candy costs $ 1000 per piece we might not bother or similarly if it is known to cause cancer we will probably give it a miss if the candy is free and safe however we will tuck in if we are required to walk to the next room to get a piece we will probably make the effort but if it is stationed half a mile away we might pause for thought and if its in the next town we will forgo the pleasure but even if the candy is healthful placed on the table next to us and free of charge we might take a piece even if we have just eaten a threecourse meal desire motivation and the pleasure we derive from things are fluid although this particular example is simplistic it shows how our brains make computations about risks rewards and payoffs using multiple brain regions often without our conscious input with this in mind where should we start well for many years a part of the basal ganglia called the nucleus accumbens has been referred to as the `` pleasure center '' unsurprisingly it is implicated in anhedonia recent studies have shown that other brain areas are also involved including the prefrontal cortex which is involved in planning and personality expression the amygdala which processes emotions and is involved in decisionmaking the striatum which is the area that houses the nucleus accumbens implicated in the reward system the insula which is thought to be important in consciousness and selfawareness the prefrontal cortex seems important in highlevel processing of rewards including costbenefit analysis and decisionmaking its connections to the ventral striatum seem to be particularly important in motivation and therefore anhedonia the role of neurotransmitters neurotransmitter imbalances have also been investigated in relation to anhedonia dopamine is of particular interest due to its involvement in reward pathways as well as the fact that it is expressed in high quantities in the nucleus accumbens in fact reduced dopamine expression in the ventral striatum of depressed people was found to correlate well with anhedonia severity but not depressive symptoms overall dopamines relationship with anhedonia and reward is a complex one though reduced dopamine levels in different parts of the brain can have different effects linking depression insomnia and the brains reward center a study finds that increased activity in a brain region responsible for rewardrelated functions reduces the risk of depression related to sleep problems read now as an example increased dopamine in the insula has the opposite effect on effortbased decisionmaking to increased dopamine in the ventral striatum so dopamine is unlikely to tell the whole story gaba an inhibitory neurotransmitter glutamate an excitatory neurotransmitter serotonin and opioids may also play their part for instance people with depression who also have pronounced anhedonia seem to have reduced gaba levels and depressed people with reduced opioid activity experience less pleasure during positive interactions a possible role for inflammation depression and inflammation have been linked for some time scientists have measured increased levels of inflammatory compounds in people with depression these chemical hallmarks include cytokines and creactive proteins cytokines shown here may be involved in anhedonia a study of people with depression published in the journal molecular psychiatry in 2015 found that increased levels of creactive protein were associated with reduced connectivity between the ventral striatum and ventromedial prefrontal cortex which is important in motivation and increased anhedonia other studies have produced similar findings so inflammation appears to be involved in both depression and anhedonia although a link between anhedonia and inflammation seems perhaps unexpected it makes sense when one peels back the layers cytokines can influence neurotransmitter metabolism and brain activity also cytokines promote socalled sickness behavior including lethargy malaise loss of appetite sleepiness and sensitivity to pain all of which have parallels in depression and people who undergo cytokine treatment for cancer often report depressive symptoms although we do not have a full understanding of the origins of anhedonia the research to date tells us that it is multifaceted and quite possibly different from person to person treating anhedonia at present there are no treatments aimed at anhedonia it is commonly treated alongside the condition that it is part of for instance selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors are often prescribed for individuals with depression there is a growing body of evidence that standard depression treatments do little for anhedonia and worse still may add to the problem by causing emotional blunting sexual anhedonia and anorgasmia or the inability to orgasm this negative interaction might be because serotonin inhibits dopamine release in certain brain regions potentially interfering with the reward motivation and pleasure circuitry on a positive note there has been recent interest in the anesthetic ketamine as a potential antianhedonic medication ketamine has shown promise as a treatment for depression quickly reducing symptoms in both major depressive disorder and bipolar disorder a study that was published in the journal nature in 2014 specifically set out to see whether it could also have an effect on anhedonia trials in rodents had already generated interesting results but this was the first time that ketamine had been investigated in humans specifically the study looked at treatmentresistant bipolar disorder the authors concluded that `` ketamine rapidly reduced the levels of anhedonia '' in fact the reduction occurred within 40 minutes and lasted up to 14 days following a single injection interestingly the reduction occurred without a similar reduction in depressive symptoms ketamine blocks nmethyldaspartate receptors thereby preventing them from being activated by glutamate this infers that glutamate an excitatory neurotransmitter might play a role in anhedonia there is still a long way to go before the many strands of anhedonia are fully understood however our knowledge is slowly growing and with time there is hope of a solution to this highly intrusive and debilitating maladyresearchers have discovered a mechanism through which toxic protein clusters develop in the brain in parkinsons disease it may be treatable with drugs approved for another disease the buildup of toxic proteins in parkinsons disease could be halted with an already approved drug in a paper published in the journal neuron the scientists describe how they discovered that increasing a fatty substance or lipid called glucosylceramide causes a buildup of toxic clusters of alphasynuclein protein inside dopamineproducing brain cells the team also revealed that treatment with an already approved glucosylceramide synthase inhibitor a drug that reduces production of the lipid reduced the toxic protein clusters which are a hallmark of parkinsons disease '' some companies '' says senior study author joseph mazzulli an assistant professor of neurology at northwestern university feinberg school of medicine in chicago il `` have been using synthase inhibitors to reduce the synthesis of the lipid and we used a similar compound on patientderived neurons in our study '' '' we were able to show it reduced toxic alphasynuclein aggregation directly within neurons derived from parkinsons patients '' he adds parkinsons arises from dopamine cell death parkinsons disease is a progressive condition that arises from the death of cells in a brain region known as the substantia nigra the cells produce a chemical messenger called dopamine that is important for regulating movement the main symptoms of parkinsons disease are tremors slowness of movement and stiffness as well as reduced balance and coordination other symptoms include emotional changes sleep disruption depression difficulty speaking problems with swallowing and chewing and constipation parkinsons mostly strikes after the age of 60 although a small number of cases are diagnosed in those under the age of 50 as the symptoms worsen it gets harder to cope with everyday tasks and lead an independent life there are more than 10 million people living with parkinsons worldwide including around 1 million in the united states where approximately 60000 cases are diagnosed every year alone while there is as yet no cure for parkinsons disease there are drugs and other treatments that offer symptom relief for many patients gba1 mutations and parkinsons disease in the study paper prof mazzulli and team explain that a strong risk factor for the development of toxic alphasynuclein clusters in parkinsons is mutations in the glucocerebrosidase gba1 gene the gene produces a protein that is important for the correct functioning of lysosomes which are compartments inside cells that break down and clear away glucosylceramide and other lipids parkinsons disease how toxic proteins damage healthy brain cells a study reveals for the first time how toxic clumps of alphasynuclein drill holes in healthy brain cells to disrupt their function read now those with one mutated copy of gba1 have higherthannormal levels of the glucosylceramide and have a greater risk of developing parkinsons disease having two mutated copies of the gene one from each parent can lead to gauchers disease which is a rare disorder wherein lysosomes fail and fatty compounds build up in the body however although it is known that gba1 mutations are linked perhaps through the disruption of glucosylceramide clearance to the development of toxic alphasynuclein clusters what has not been clear until the new study is the mechanism behind it mutated gba1 may not be necessary to investigate the scientists tested the effects of a drug that raises levels of glucosylceramide in dopamineproducing neurons grown from patientderived stem cells the cells did not have mutated forms of the gba1 gene they discovered that even without the mutated gene there was a significant buildup of toxic alphasynuclein clusters in the neurons prof mazzulli suggests that this indicates that the conversion of normal alphasynuclein into its toxic form did not necessarily depend on `` the presence of the mutated gba1 protein but more importantly the decreased activity and accumulation of glucosylceramide '' complex alphasynuclein and toxic clusters on closer investigation of the conversion of alphasynuclein from its normal to toxic form the team discovered that it was not just the simple form of alphasynuclein as previously thought that converted into a toxic cluster instead glucosylceramide was directly converting the complex form of alphasynuclein into toxic clusters `` we were surprised to find that toxic aggregation occurred by direct conversion of the large alphasynuclein complex '' prof mazzulli explains '' we thought '' he continues `` that the complex would have to first disassemble before forming toxic aggregates but thats not what our data indicated '' he says that drugs devised for the treatment of gauchers disease might be one way to target this mechanism these findings also offer a way to measure how well drugs might perform in trials while the goal of parkinsons treatment is to reduce alphasynuclein clusters measuring levels of the toxic protein in living patients is not straightforward '' its far easier to measure the effects of therapeutics that alter glucosylceramide in patients since the lipid can be directly measured from easily accessible fluids such as blood or cerebral spinal fluid '' prof joseph mazzullia new study now published in the journal psychotherapy and psychosomatics has found a link between a common class of stomach drugs called proton pump inhibitors and depression the researchers suggest that the pills might lead to major depressive disorder by disrupting the guts bacteria common stomach drugs may trigger depression by disrupting the gutbrain axis suggests new research more and more studies are now pointing to the numerous ways in which our gut bacteria may influence both our mental and emotional wellbeing for instance researchers have found that germfree mice that had been deprived of beneficial gut bacteria displayed symptoms of anxiety depression and cognitive impairment since the bacteria in our gut can alter the function of our brain by producing certain hormones or neurotransmitters and emotional responses can in turn affect our gut bacteria it should come as no surprise that some studies have found a link between posttraumatic stress disorder and certain strains of bacteria other studies have not only pinpointed specific bacteria whose absence can trigger symptoms of depression in rodents but they have also shown that supplementing said bacteria can reverse signs of depression now an observational study suggests that proton pump inhibitors which are a class of drugs typically prescribed to treat acidrelated stomach conditions such as gastroesophageal reflux disease increase the risk of developing major depressive disorder this is the leading cause of disability both in the united states and worldwide the first author of the new study is weisheng huang from the department of psychiatry at the taipei veterans general hospital in taiwan stomach acid pills may disrupt gutbrain axis huang and team examined data on 2366 individuals who had been taking proton pump inhibitors and went on to develop depression and compared them with 9464 people who also took the drugs but did not develop depression the latter group of participants was `` matched for age sex enrollment time end point time and followup period '' antidepressants do they really work we take a critical look at the effectiveness of these commonly prescribed drugs read now the researchers applied logistic regression analysis and adjusted for various demographic factors as well as for psychiatric comorbidities such as anxiety and substance abuse disorders the study revealed that compared with those who did not develop major depressive disorder `` patients with major depression had a greater prevalence of higher cumulative defined daily dose '' of proton pump inhibitors specifically the risk of clinical depression increased for those who took the drugs pantoprazole lansoprazole and rabeprazole while in those who used omeprazole and esomeprazole `` only a trend significance was noted '' '' to our knowledge '' write the study authors `` this was the first study to investigate the association between proton pump inhibitor exposure and the risk of major depression '' while the mechanisms behind such an association remain mysterious the authors venture a couple of possible explanations the drugs might raise depression risk by dysregulating the gutbrain axis they suggest or by preventing the organism from properly absorbing nutrients after the use of stomach drugs still the researchers caution that physicians should continue to prescribe the drugs as and when needed bearing in mind the range of side effects that these drugs may have which include pneumonia bone fracture and gastrointestinal infections huang and team recommend that future studies investigate the pathophysiology behind the association they foundcolorectal cancer is quite common especially among the aging population an important risk factor for colorectal cancer is diet and dietary choices are also vital during and after treatment in this spotlight we give you an overview of which diets are best and which are best avoided what does a good diet for preventing colorectal cancer and for aiding cancer treatment look like colorectal cancer is a type of cancer that affects a persons rectum colon or both this is also known as the large intestine according to the american cancer society acs 2018 could bring around 97220 new diagnoses of colon cancer and 43030 new cases of rectal cancer to the united states this type of cancer is more likely to appear in older individuals but there are many other risk factors associated with its emergence such as genetic and lifestyle factors of the latter one of the most cited risk factors is diet referring specifically to poor dietary habits that often also lead to obesity below we look at which foods and nutrients have been said to raise the risk of colorectal cancer and which types of diet have been deemed helpful in its prevention we also cover the diets most likely to keep the body resilient during and after treatment for this type of cancer prevention what to avoid numerous studies have indicated that a diet too rich in red meat is associated with a heightened risk of colorectal cancer `` red meat '' is defined by the world health organization who as `` all mammalian muscle meat including beef veal pork lamb mutton horse and goat '' eating a lot of red meat is known to significantly increase the risk of colorectal cancer a review of the evidence supporting this link notes that `` consumption of red meat might be related directly to the incidence of colorectal cancer or indirectly because a diet high in meat tends to be low in vegetables fruit and fiber '' a study of north italian populations showed that individuals who eat red meat alongside eggs cheese and other fatty foods as well as refined starches on a frequent basis had an almost twice higher risk of developing rectal or colon cancer than their peers who favored a plantbased diet more recent research also revealed that `` a daily increase of 100 grams of all meat or red meat is associated with a significant 12–17 percent increased risk of colorectal cancer '' in 2015 a report published by the international agency for research on cancer made the news by pointing out that every 50gram portion of processed meat such as bacon or salami eaten every day increases a persons risk of developing colorectal cancer by 18 percent this evidence led the who to classify processed meats as `` carcinogenic to humans '' the damage caused by unwholesome diets made the headlines again in early 2018 when a study published in the bmj reported that `` ultraprocessed foods '' might increase the risk of developing various types of cancer prevention what to eat so if a high intake of red meat and processed foods contributes to the risk of colorectal cancer what should be eaten to protect our bodies from this outcome in order to reduce the risk of colorectal cancer eat a healthful diet that favors fruit and veg according to the acs a diet high in fruits vegetables and fibers could help to minimize the risk and many existing studies seem to support this advice a study from the loma linda university in california found that vegetarianstyle diets are linked to a decreased risk of colorectal cancer the researchers studied four types of plantbased diet these were vegan or strictly no products of animal origin lactoovo vegetarian which includes dairy and eggs but no meat pescovegetarian which includes fish but no meat semivegetarian which includes meat and fish infrequently all four of these plantbased diets were deemed to be less likely to lead to cancer than nonvegetarian diets one study from last year also suggests that the more colorful your meal the better and that individuals should focus on integrating a rainbow of fruit and vegetables into their diets more specifically their experiments on the pig model which provides the closest resemblance to the human body in terms of metabolic processes indicated that purple potatoes might protect against colon cancer that may be because these root vegetables contain compounds that reduce levels of certain proinflammatory proteins in the body and inflammation is known to contribute to colon cancer risk the state of cancer are we close to a cure are we getting closer to finding a cure for cancer read now recently researchers have also isolated a number of elements typical of mediterraneanstyle diets that could help to prevent the onset of colorectal cancer people with a low risk of developing this condition ate plenty of fruits vegetables nuts and whole grains as well as fish and poultry rather than red meat and they drank little alcohol and soft drinks what to eat during and after treatment according to guidelines from the danafarber cancer institute in boston ma people undergoing treatment for colorectal cancer should also favor the `` rainbow plate '' meals and eat a varied array of fruits and vegetables to support their immune system a diet rich in tree nuts could improve the outcomes of cancer treatment eating small but frequent portions is another approach that specialists at the danafarber institute suggest that people following treatment may find useful they advise patients to stay hydrated and avoid alcohol and caffeine explaining that some types of medication may clash with these beverages but a previous study conducted by researchers at the institute which we covered on medical news today indicated that those undergoing treatment for colorectal cancer had an almost halved risk of cancer recurrence if they drank four cups of coffee or 460 milligrams of caffeine per day as lead study author charles fuchs explains `` we found that coffee drinkers had a lower risk of the cancer coming back and a significantly greater survival and chance of a cure '' research published last year in jama oncology suggests that a diet high in sources of fiber may improve survival rates for patients with stage one colorectal cancer eating whole grains was also linked to a better treatment outcome the researchers noted another study from last year notes that eating a minimum of 2 ounces approximately 57 grams of tree nuts such as cashews hazelnuts walnuts and pistachios almost halved the risk of colon cancer recurrence for individuals following stage three cancer treatment tree nut consumption also reduced the risk of death following treatment by 53 percent as for the risk of developing a second cancer following treatment the acs say that it can be reduced by making the same healthful diet choices advised for the prevention of a first cancer these include maintaining a healthy weight placing `` an emphasis on plant foods '' in daily meals and avoiding alcohol intake in fact dr victor moreno from the university of barcelona in spain and colleagues found that lifestyle factors are more important than genetic risk factors when it comes to the development of colorectal cancer '' this is important considering that lifestyle unlike genetic traits is somewhat modifiable '' first study author dr gemma ibáñez this suggests that a `` revamp '' of personal health choices may go a long way toward supporting positive outcomesresearchers in germany have found further evidence to support the idea that parkinsons could be an autoimmune disease immune cells act differently depending on whether or not a person has parkinsons using a stem cell model they showed how immune cells attacked dopamineproducing cells derived from people with parkinsons disease but not from people without it dopamine is a chemical messenger that supports many important brain functions these include functions that deal with reward emotions pleasure and movement control in parkinsons disease the midbrain neurons or brain cells that make dopamine die off but it is not clear what causes their death as more and more dopamine cells die levels of the chemical messenger drop giving rise to symptoms such as tremor slowness rigidity and problems with balance problems with speech and swallowing also develop as do several nonmovement symptoms estimates suggest that around half a million people in the united states have parkinsons disease autoimmunity and parkinsons autoimmune diseases arise because the immune system attacks healthy organs tissues and cells instead of protecting them there are at least 80 different known types of autoimmune disease including rheumatoid arthritis multiple sclerosis lupus and type 1 diabetes although the idea that parkinsons could be an autoimmune disease is not new the biological evidence to back it up is only just emerging in 2017 for instance a study from the us revealed how pieces of a protein that builds up in the dopamine cells of people with parkinsons can trigger a deadly immune attack against the cells parkinsons sniff test could predict risk up to a decade earlier adults who scored low on a sniff test were found to be almost five times more likely to develop parkinsons disease during a 10year followup read now more recently scientists have linked the use of drugs that subdue the immune system to a lower risk of developing parkinsons disease in the new study researchers from friedrichalexanderuniversität fau in erlangennürnberg germany have shown that t helper 17 th17 cells a type of immune t cell attack dopamine cells derived from people with parkinsons disease but not those derived from people without it they report their findings in the journal cell stem cell '' thanks to our investigations '' says senior study author beate winner a professor in the department of stem cell biology at fau `` we were able to clearly prove not only that t cells are involved in causing parkinsons disease but also what role they actually play '' stem cell model of parkinsons disease together with a team from the movement disorders clinic at university hospital erlangen the fau researchers had earlier discovered that the brains of those with parkinsons had higher levels of th17 cells th17 cells are also found in higher amounts in people with rheumatoid arthritis and other autoimmune diseases the discovery spurred the team to investigate further using a stem cell model of parkinsons disease to develop the model they took skin cells from people with and without parkinsons and induced them to become `` pluripotent stem cells '' pluripotent stem cells have the ability to mature into virtually any type of cell including neurons they coaxed the stem cells to mature into midbrain neurons that make dopamine this meant that they had batches of newly created dopamine cells that were specific to each of the patients the team then exposed each batch of dopamine cells to fresh th17 cells taken from the patients in this way each batch of patientspecific dopamine cells was exposed only to th17 cells that came from that same patient the results showed that while the th17 cells killed many of the dopamine cells from patients with parkinsons this did not happen with the cells that came from patients without the disease in further experiments the scientists also discovered that an antibody that was already in use in the hospital for the treatment of psoriasis was `` able to largely prevent the death '' of the brain cells '' the findings from our study offer a significant basis for new methods of treating parkinsons disease '' prof beate winnera largescale twopart study now published in the lancet public health journal examines the effects of high moderate and low carbohydrate intake on mortality risk the results of a new study could make you think twice before turning down carbs as more and more people are concerned with losing weight the prevalence of the lowcarb diet is increasing however new research points out that both too much carbohydrate and too little in our diet may be a cause for concern also according to the new research if you must choose between two types of lowcarb diet you should choose the one that replaces carbs with plantderived proteins and fats such diets may help prolong life unlike the diets that replace carbs with animal proteins and fat dr sara seidelmann who is a clinical and research fellow in cardiovascular medicine at brigham and womens hospital in boston ma led the research according to her `` lowcarb diets that replace carbohydrates with protein or fat are gaining widespread popularity as a health and weight loss strategy '' however our data suggest that animalbased lowcarbohydrate diets which are prevalent in north america and europe might be associated with shorter overall lifespan and should be discouraged '' '' instead if one chooses to follow a lowcarbohydrate diet then exchanging carbohydrates for more plantbased fats and proteins might actually promote healthy aging in the longterm '' dr sara seidelmann studying carbohydrate intake and mortality dr seidelmann and colleagues explain the motivation for their research previous studies they say have suggested that lowcarb diets are good for weight loss and metabolic health however these findings referred only to the short term the longterm effect of a low consumption of carbs on mortality risk has not garnered enough attention in the research community and the studies that have examined the matter yielded conflicting results also studies have not yet looked at the fat and protein sources in these lowcarb diets and their impact on mortality risk fats or carbs what causes obesity a new study settles the debate read now to remedy this the researchers studied over 15400 people aged 45–64 who registered in the atherosclerosis risk in communities study in 1987–1989 the male study participants reported an intake of 600–4200 kilocalories per day on average while the females said that they consumed 500–3600 kilocaleries per day the participants answered questions about their dietary habits both at the beginning of the study and 6 years later at followup the questionnaire asked about what types of food and drink the participants consumed in what portions and with what frequency then the scientists analyzed the link between overall carbohydrate consumption and mortality from any cause in the second stage of the study the team conducted a metaanalysis of cohort studies that summed up over 430000 people from across the world moderatecarb plantbased diet may be ideal the first part of the study revealed that both a low intake of carbs less than 40 percent of the total energy intake coming from carbs and a high intake or over 70 percent correlated with a higher risk of premature mortality by comparison a moderate carb intake of 50–55 percent of the total energy was found to correlate with 4 more years of life expectancy compared with people who consumed too little carbohydrate the second part of the study reinforced these findings and found that replacing carbs with animal proteins in a lowcarb diet correlated with a higher risk of mortality than consuming carbs in moderation '' too much and too little carbohydrate can be harmful but what counts most is the type of fat protein and carbohydrate '' says study coauthor walter willett a professor of epidemiology and nutrition at the harvard t h chan school of public health in boston ma senior study author dr scott solomon a professor of medicine at harvard medical school weighs in on the findings '' this work '' he says `` provides the most comprehensive study of carbohydrate intake that has been done to date and helps us better understand the relationship between the specific components of diet and longterm health '' '' while a randomized trial has not been performed to compare the longerterm effects of different types of lowcarbohydrate diets these data suggest that shifting towards a more plantbased consumption is likely to help attenuate major morbid disease '' dr scott solomonnew research has found that fasting triggers a molecule that can delay the aging of our arteries the findings could help prevent agerelated chronic diseases such as cancer cardiovascular disease and alzheimers scientists have discovered a new role for a molecule produced during fasting it can keep our vascular system supple and young the search for eternal youth has preoccupied the human imagination since the times of ancient greece in fact a quick look at greek mythology shows that youth was more prized than immortality as some myths tell the story of how futile the latter is if its not accompanied by the former in this regard modern medicine has recently been catching up with ancient mythology emerging scientific breakthroughs encourage us to hope that the myth of eternal youth will soon become a reality in a recent study researchers were able to reverse signs of aging such as hair loss and wrinkles in mice and perhaps more impressively another team of researchers managed to rejuvenate aging human cells now a new study adds to the evidence that aging can indeed be reversed scientists led by dr minghui zou the director of the center for molecular and translational medicine at georgia state university in atlanta showed that fasting or restricting calorie intake can produce a molecule that delays vascular aging the findings were published in the journal molecular cell how a ketone molecule keeps cells young dr zou explains the motivation for this study saying `` the most important part of aging is vascular aging when people become older the vessels that supply different organs are the most sensitive and more subject to aging damage so studying vascular aging is very important '' so the scientists set out to focus on vascular aging on the changes that occur with senescence and on ways to prevent them could this hormone rejuvenate memory a hormone produced in our bones may prevent agerelated cognitive decline read now specifically the researchers looked at the link between calorie restriction and vascular aging dr zou used mouse models of atherosclerosis studied their aortas postmortem and performed a series of cell culture experiments they also induced starvation in the rodents and conducted similar tests they saw that as expected the starving mice produced the molecule betahydroxybutyrate surprisingly however this molecule also prevented vascular aging betahydroxybutyrate is a ketone that is a molecule produced by the liver and used as an energy source when glucose is not available the body produces ketones during fasting or starvation on lowcarb diets and after prolonged exercise interestingly the research also revealed that betahydroxybutyrate promotes the division and multiplication of the cells that line the inside of blood vessels cellular division is a marker of cellular youth '' we found that betahydroxybutyrate can delay vascular aging thats actually providing a chemical link between calorie restriction and fasting and the antiaging effect '' dr minghui zou '' this compound can delay vascular aging through endothelial cells '' dr zou explains `` which line the interior surface of blood vessels and lymphatic vessels it can prevent one type of cell aging called senescence or cellular aging '' a drug target to stop aging chronic disease the study also revealed that the compound triggers another chain reaction that keeps the dna of these endothelial cells young and undamaged more specifically when betahydroxybutyrate attaches to the rnabinding protein heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein a1 it boosts the activity of a stem cell transcriptional factor called octamerbinding transcriptional factor oct4 in turn oct4 `` increases lamin b1 a key factor against dna damageinduced senescence '' which keeps the blood vessels young '' this stem cell factor oct4 '' says dr zou `` could be a pharmaceutical or pharmacological target for slowing down or preventing aging '' '' then if the vascular system becomes younger it is less likely to have cardiovascular disease alzheimers disease and cancer because all of these diseases are agerelated '' dr minghui zou '' we think this is a very important discovery and we are working on finding a new chemical that can mimic the effect of this ketone bodys function '' dr zou adds '' its difficult to convince people not to eat for the next 24 hours to increase the concentration of this compound and not everybody can do that but if we can find something that can mimic this effect and people can still eat it would make life more enjoyable and help fight disease ''hot tea is a staple beverage in winter time it can help to keep us warm and soothe sore throats it can give us that energy boost in the morning or help to relax us in the afternoon however a new study suggests that drinking hot tea may have serious negative consequences for some of us many of us enjoy a hot cup of tea but could we be putting ourselves at risk without knowing it across the world hot tea is a muchloved drink euromonitor international estimate that around 29 million tons of tea were consumed in 2016 alone this comes as no surprise seeing that teas are tasty and can bring many health benefits often brought about by the antioxidant effects of compounds such as polyphenols however a recent study from peking university in beijing china has found that the temperature at which tea is consumed could affect health particularly in certain groups already at risk of negative health outcomes lead study author jun lv a doctoral student from peking universitys department of epidemiology and biostatistics found that the consumption of hot tea correlates with the onset of esophageal cancer according to the world cancer research fund international esophageal cancer is the eighth most common type of cancer worldwide in the united states there were an estimated 16940 new cases of esophageal cancer in 2017 while in 2014 approximately 45547 people had this type of cancer according to lv drinking hot tea on a regular basis is linked to esophageal cancer in people who also smoke and drink alcohol habitually thus pointing to a complex favorable conjuncture for the development of this disease lv and colleagues conducted their research as part of the national natural science foundation of china and the national key research and development program the studys findings were published in the journal annals of internal medicine a fivefold increase in risk of cancer lv and team studied the link between drinking tea at very high temperatures and the development of esophageal cancer in the chinese population china is not only the number one consumer of tea but it is also a country with one of the highest incidences of this type of cancer according to the researchers chinese men in particular are most likely to be keen on not only hot tea but on cigarettes and alcohol as well the combination of tobacco alcohol compounds found in tea and the negative effects of drinks served at very high temperatures is likely to attack health eventually lv and colleagues suggest one injection could kill cancer are we drawing nearer to a cure for cancer read now the researchers monitored the health of participants in the china kadoorie biobank study whose aim is to collect data on the development of chronic diseases including heart diseases cancer and diabetes in china to ensure the consistency of their results the scientists excluded participants who had an existing diagnosis of cancer as well as those who had cut down on tea alcohol and cigarettes in the end they analyzed the data sourced from 456155 adult participants aged between 30 and 79 all these participants health developments were then followedup for a median period of 92 years during this period 1731 participants were diagnosed with esophageal cancer lv and team uncovered a positive correlation between drinking burninghot tea regular alcohol intake and smoking and a higher risk of esophageal cancer those who engaged in all three of these habits showed a fivefold increase in the risk for this type of cancer compared with their peers who did not drink tea at high temperatures drink alcohol or smoke cigarettes individuals who only drank hot tea and who did not drink alcohol or smoke did not have a higher risk of esophageal cancer either suggesting that the concerted effect of those three behaviors was a major risk factor based on the findings lv and colleagues advise people to choose their habits carefully and if they find it challenging to give up their daily drink or cigarette the researchers suggest that its best to avoid drinking tea at very high temperatures they conclude '' our findings suggest that abstaining from hot tea might be beneficial for preventing esophageal cancer in persons who drink alcohol excessively or smoke ''intermittent fasting such as eating only on alternate days might enhance the ability of aerobic exercise to increase endurance because the body switches to using fats and ketones as a source of fuel for muscles instead of carbohydrates research shows the effects of intermittent fasting on endurance this was the conclusion that researchers came to after studying the effect in mice with such a regimen for a limited period of time their study is to be published in the faseb journal the findings suggest that three meals per day and snacking may not be the only eating habit for people who engage in endurance sports to reach peak performance and maintain good health '' emerging evidence '' explains senior study author dr mark mattson from the laboratory of neurosciences in the national institute on aging in baltimore md `` suggests that intermittent dietary energy restriction might improve overall health and reduce risk factors for diabetes and cardiovascular disease in humans '' he and his team say that their findings propose that a similar pattern of eating and fasting may boost the beneficial effect of moderate aerobic exercise on endurance and that it should be studied further food deprivation exercise and endurance for the study the team put mice into four groups and observed them for 2 months as they went through the following exercise and eating patterns the control ctrl mice did not exercise at all and could eat as much food as they wanted every day like the ctrl mice the exercise ex mice could eat as much daily food as they wanted but they also ran on a treadmill for 45 minutes each day the `` alternate day food deprivation '' adf mice were only fed a fixed amount on every other day and did not exercise at all the exadf mice were restricted to the adf eating pattern but also exercised every day on a treadmill for 45 minutes how intermittent fasting can increase weight loss learn how researchers explored the chemical pathways that might be involved in intermittent fasting without restricting overall calorie intake read now as expected the results showed that the mice that exercised daily the ex and exadf groups performed better in endurance tests than the two groups that did not exercise at all ctrl and adf however the adf mice that exercised daily the exadf group had better endurance that is they could run farther and last longer than the daily exercise mice that were allowed to eat what they wanted the ex group the researchers also found that the mice on adf were able to maintain their body weight and had better glucose tolerance `` regardless of whether they exercised or not '' they note that following glucose metabolism although the ex groups glucose levels recovered at a faster rate than the ctrl groups the glucose levels of the adf and exadf groups recovered even faster shifted fuel preference the results showed that the effect of adf was to `` shift fuel preference '' in muscles toward fatty acids and away from carbohydrates and it also `` enhanced endurance '' in the adf mice that exercised exadf the researchers also found that the enhanced endurance performance did not come from changes to volume of oxygen usage or vo2max a way of measuring the amount of energy used during exercise as the rise in this measure was the same in both exercise groups ex and exadf instead the increased endurance in the exercising adf mice exadf group compared with the unrestricted eating exercising mice ex group came from a reduction in their respiratory exchange ratio or the ratio of co2 produced to o2 consumed this note the authors suggests that adf caused the fuel source to switch from carbohydrates to fats the scientists also observed that adf affects the liver differently to exercise for example adf alters gene expression that regulates `` lipid metabolism and cell growth '' whereas exercise changes gene expression that alters `` calcium signaling and stress adaptation '' the findings support the idea that evolutionary pressure has caused the body to optimize and perform extremely well when food is scarce dr thoru pederson editorinchief of the faseb journal comments on this '' this study reminds us of the nexus between our own huntergatherer metabolism still operative and modern habits with the findings from this animal system likely transferable to us to a considerable degree '' dr thoru pedersonsome cancers put up a fight against regular treatments such as chemotherapy or radiotherapy due to their various `` strategies '' for survival but by manipulating cellular processes scientists have now found a way of bypassing one of cancers selfpreservation mechanisms recent research reveals how we may be able to bypass one of cancers survival strategies and trigger tumor cell death autophagy a term meaning `` selfdevouring '' in greek is normally cells way of staying orderly and functional this is due to the fact that when autophagy is triggered cells break down the elements that arent useful any longer and `` recycle '' material for reuse this process has been shown to have complex implications for cancer cells sometimes it helps to destroy them but at other times it helps them to thrive one way in which cancer cells use autophagy `` in their own interest '' is to evade apoptosis or cell death apoptosis and autophagy both rely on similar mechanisms to break down cellular material that is no longer helpful but while apoptosis takes this disassembly all the way eventually causing the cell to die in autophagy death is postponed by recycling some of the cellular material in many cases researchers have discovered that chemotherapy and radiotherapy can increase the presence of autophagy in cancer cells which actually allows them to enter a `` hiatus '' mode that helps them to evade cell death and resume their activity later while researchers have studied the importance of autophagy inhibitors in promoting apoptosis the underlying mechanisms that allow cell death to occur when this recycling process is inhibited have remained unclear now researchers from the university of colorado cancer center in aurora have begun to uncover some of these mechanisms which has also allowed them to develop a fresh strategy to bypass tumor cells autophagy and trigger their death more efficiently the results of the study which was led by andrew thorburn have now been published in the journal developmental cell autophagy as suspended animation in the new study the researchers explain that the sofar mysterious link between autophagy and apoptosis is transcription factor foxo3a which is a protein that carries with it `` instructions '' as to what should take place at cellular level '' the problem '' says thorburn `` is this many anticancer treatments push cancer cells to the brink of death but the cells use autophagy to go into a kind of suspended animation pausing but not dying '' '' we dont want cancer cells to pause we want them to die we show that foxo3a may make the difference between these two outcomes '' andrew thorburn it turns out that foxo3a plays a key role in the cellular homeostasis related to autophagy that is it helps to regulate that process interestingly though autophagy also helps to regulate the levels of this transcription factor in other words when the presence of autophagy is increased foxo3a levels go down and when autophagy is downregulated more foxo3a is produced thereby boosting the cellular recycling process this means that autophagy remains at constant levels sometimes despite the action of chemotherapy drugs the state of cancer are we close to a cure where is cancer research in its quest for a cure read now previous research carried out at thorburns laboratory revealed that another protein known as puma is key in `` telling '' cells when to selfdestruct now thorburn and team have also found that foxo3a can increase the expression of the gene that drives the production of puma long story short when autophagy is inhibited more foxo3a is produced and when that happens the heightened levels of foxo3a help boost the presence of autophagy in cancer cells again but at the same time the transcription factor increases the presence of puma which drives cell death mechanism suggests combination therapy following these discoveries the scientists were interested in seeing whether they could use these mechanisms to render cancer cells more vulnerable to apoptosis their strategy involved using autophagy inhibitors alongside a tumor suppressing drug called nutlin while the drug is known to stunt the growth of cancer cells it had not been tied to triggering cell death so the researchers wanted to learn whether by pairing it up with autophagy inhibitors apoptosis would be prompted more efficiently the reason why thorburn and colleagues decided to test both therapies in concert is because both autophagy inhibition and nutlin are known to increase the production of puma though they do so through independent channels foxo3a and a transcription factor known as p53 respectively '' what we wanted to see '' says first author brent fitzwalter `` is whether these two things together nutlin along with autophagy inhibition would increase puma past the point of growth inhibition and into actual cell death '' after analyzing a series of tests conducted on cell cultures and mouse models of cancer tumors the researchers were delighted to see that this strategy did work the way they hoped it would '' the result was that we turned a drug that could slow down tumor growth but couldnt kill cancer cells into one that now kills the cells '' andrew thorburn these findings the researchers add could provide the groundwork for future clinical trials putting this combination treatment to the test to confirm its effectcoffee is a complex substance and as a new study finds its metabolic interactions are equally complex surprisingly coffee influences the same regions of the brain as cannabis a new study finds an intriguing relationship between cannabis and coffee although studies looking at coffees health benefits or lack thereof appear to be published on an almost daily basis its true impact on health is still poorly understood some studies have found health benefits some have concluded that it might reduce mortality risk and others drew no solid conclusions this confusion is due to several factors and one is the difficulty in separating cause and effect in large populationbased studies for example someone who drinks a lot of coffee might also sleep less smoke more tobacco drink less water or work unsociable hours these factors muddy the statistical waters also coffee is an incredibly complex beast it contains more than 1000 aroma compounds levels of which vary depending on the type of coffee bean and how it is brewed the metabolites of coffee recently a group of researchers from northwestern university in chicago il took a detailed look at the impact of coffee consumption on our internal chemistry their findings were published this week in the journal of internal medicine the 3month study involved 47 people living in finland in the first month the participants drank no coffee at all in the second they consumed four cups every day and in the third they drank eight cups each day cannabis intoxication may be stopped with antiobesity drug researchers may have found an antidote to cannabinoid intoxication read now using advanced profiling techniques lead author marilyn cornelis and her team checked the levels of more than 800 metabolites in the blood after each stage metabolites are chemicals produced during metabolism they are generally small molecules and carry out a range of functions both within and between cells the scientists found that with increased coffee consumption blood metabolites involved in the endocannabinoid system dropped off this is the system that gives cannabis its recreational and medical effects interestingly the effect of coffee consumption on the endocannabinoid system was the opposite to cannabis use endocannabinoid neurotransmitters decreased with the consumption of eight cups per day but levels are increased by cannabis use endocannabinoids may answer queries the endocannabinoid system helps to modulate a whole host of metabolic activities including blood pressure cognition addiction immunity appetite sleep and glucose metabolism so if coffee influences this overarching system it will open up many new research avenues '' these are entirely new pathways by which coffee might affect health '' notes cornelis `` now we want to delve deeper and study how these changes affect the body '' for instance the endocannabinoid system is believed to influence eating behavior as cornelis says this could help to explain `` the link between cannabis use and the munchies '' conversely coffee has been considered a potential weight loss aid and may reduce type 2 diabetes risk '' this is often thought to be due to caffeines ability to boost fat metabolism or the glucoseregulating effects of polyphenols plantderived chemicals '' marilyn cornelis '' our new findings linking coffee to endocannabinoids '' she adds `` offer alternative explanations worthy of further study '' drinking more coffee was also found to increase metabolites from the androsteroid system this infers that coffee speeds up the excretion of steroids and because steroids are involved in a number of conditions notably cancers coffee could potentially play a part here too this study was the first to have demonstrated such a depth of metabolic interaction between coffee and the endocannabinoid system no doubt these new learnings will form the foundations of future research into a range of conditions however more work will be needed to understand whether the observed changes in metabolites were due to caffeine or one of the myriad other compounds in those cups of delicious black goldone of the hallmarks of advanced prostate cancer is a faulty pten tumor suppressor gene now after screening compounds for their effect on cells lacking pten scientists have discovered that a natural insecticide called deguelin can kill such cells by disrupting their energy supply researchers reveal how a natural insecticide can destroy advanced prostate cancer cells deguelin belongs to a class of drugs known as mitochondrial inhibitors the drugs block the action of mitochondria mitochondria are the tiny compartments inside cells that convert glucose in the cell into molecules of adenosine triphosphate atp which serve as units of energy for fueling the various workings of the cell scientists at cold spring harbor laboratory in new york found that treating cells lacking pten with some types of mitochondrial inhibitor caused the cells to use glucose from their environment to make atp and then transport it into their mitochondria to preserve them it is as though cells without pten explains study leader lloyd trotman a professor at cold spring harbor laboratory are driven to `` consume vast quantities of glucose '' to help their mitochondria survive they do this to the point where they run out of fuel and die the researchers describe their work which included the use of a genetic mouse model of metastatic prostate cancer that was developed by prof trotmans group in a paper now published in the journal cell reports they suggest that their findings show that at the right dose certain mitochondrial inhibitors such as deguelin and another that they identified called rotenone may be able to kill prostate cancer cells without harming healthy cells however they also note that the timing and conditions have to be just right – for example the drug would not work if glucose levels are high '' the hope is '' prof trotman explains `` that carefully timed administration of these drugs can generate a much better window of selective killing '' prostate cancer and tumor suppressors after skin cancer prostate cancer is the most common cancer in men in the united states where in 2017 an estimated 161360 people discovered that they had the disease in the vast majority of cases prostate cancer is diagnosed before the disease has started to spread while the cancer is in this localized state it is much easier to treat and the 5year survival rate is close to 100 percent however once the cancer has become metastatic that is it has spread and set up new tumors in other parts of the body it is much harder to treat for men diagnosed with metastatic or advanced prostate cancer the average 5year survival rate is 29 percent in their study paper the authors note that a `` hallmark of advanced prostate cancer '' is that two tumor suppressor genes pten and p53 do not work properly because they are mutated when tumor suppressor genes work properly they `` slow down cell division '' repair broken dna and trigger programmed cell death faulty tumor suppressor genes on the other hand fail to carry out these functions and give rise to faulty cells that can grow uncontrollably and cause cancer deguelin stopped cancer progression prof trotman and colleagues suggest that of the 3 million men in the us who have prostate cancer `` roughly 100000 carry cancers with comutation of pten and p53 '' this `` prompted '' them to look for drugs that might work specifically against prostate cancers that carry mutated pten and p53 however because `` several studies '' have shown that loss only of p53 does not give rise to prostate cancer they decided to focus on pten shapeshifting cancer cells promote metastasis learn how loss of certain proteins makes prostate cancer cells able to change shape migrate and invade other tissues read now the researchers began the study by running a series of experiments using cells with and without pten they found that deguelin had the capacity to kill both types of cell but the dose required to kill cells with pten the normal cell model was 500 times higher than the dose required to kill cells without pten the cancer cell model they also discovered that the drug had a much stronger effect on the cells without pten because their mitochondria were consuming atp `` instead of producing it '' '' thats the exact opposite '' prof trotman says `` of what mitochondria are supposed to be doing mitochondria are supposed to generate atp for the rest of the cell '' finally when they then tested deguelin in their mouse model of `` lethal '' metastatic prostate cancer the researchers found that it stopped the cancer progressing drug requires low glucose levels the researchers suggest that the `` vulnerability '' that their findings have identified in ptendeficient cells may pave the way for `` highly selective targeting of incurable '' prostate cancer using mitochondrial inhibitors metformin the widely prescribed diabetes drug is also a mitochondrial inhibitor and is already being tested in clinical trials as an anticancer treatment the authors note that in the case of prostate cancer treatment with metformin seems to reduce disease deaths but not incidence '' this suggests '' they add `` that metformin may preferentially target aggressive prostate cancer '' and there are currently trials trying to find this out they propose that their new findings `` contribute to these efforts '' however they note that their study also suggests that one of the conditions necessary for mitochondrial inhibitors to have `` maximal selective killing '' power is `` depletion of tumor cell glucose supplies '' this would indicate the need for a treatment scenario that is opposite to that of diabetes in which metformin is taken just after a meal when blood glucose levels are high the authors conclude '' our results instead suggest that greater selectivity might be achieved if drugs are given when blood glucose levels are low ''there are a million things that we do every day without thinking brushing our teeth drying our hair after a shower and unlocking our phone screen so we can check our messages are all part of our routine but what takes place in the brain as we learn a new habit what happens in the brain when habits take shape whats something youve learned to do without thinking it might be locking the door behind you as you leave which could lead to some panic later as you wonder if you actually remembered to do it it might be driving to work have you ever had that uncanny experience of finding yourself at your destination without fully remembering how you got there i certainly have and its all thanks to the brains trusty autopilot mode habits drive our lives so much so that sometimes we might want to break the habit as the saying goes and experience something new but habits are a useful tool when we do something enough times we become effortlessly good at it which is perhaps why aristotle reportedly believed that `` excellence is not an act but a habit '' so what does habit formation look like in the brain how do our neural networks behave as we learn something and consolidate it into an effortless behavior through repetition these are the questions that ann graybiel and her colleagues from the massachusetts institute of technology in chestnut hill set out to answer in a recent study the findings of which are published in the journal current biology bookending neural signals although a habitual action seems so simple and effortless it actually typically involves a string of small necessary movements such as unlocking the car getting into it adjusting the mirrors securing the seatbelt and so on this complex set of movements that amount to one routine action that we perform unconsciously is called `` chunking '' and although we know that it exists exactly how `` chunks '' form and stabilize has remained mysterious so far could this protein hold the key to memory to store or not to store learn about the protein that may hold the key to memory retention read now the new study now suggests that some brain cells are tasked with `` bookending '' the chunks that correspond to habitual actions in another study graybiel and her former team found that the striatum a region of the brain previously associated with decisionmaking also plays an important role in acquiring habits working with mice the team noted that the patterns of signals transmitted between neurons in the striatum shifted as the animals were taught a new sequence of actions turning in one direction at a sound signal while navigating a maze which then evolved into a habit at the beginning of the learning process the neurons in the mices striata emitted a continuous string of signals the scientists saw but as the mices actions started to consolidate into habitual movements the neurons fired their distinctive signals only at the beginning and at the end of the task performed when a signaling pattern takes root explain graybiel and colleagues a habit has taken shape and breaking it becomes a difficult endeavor brain patterns that indicate habits although edifying graybiels previous efforts did not establish for certain that the signaling patterns observed in the brain were related to habit formation they could simply have been motor commands that regulated the mices running behavior in order to confirm the idea that the patterns corresponded to the chunking associated with habit formation graybiel and her current team devised a different set of experiments in the new study they set out to teach rats to press two levers repeatedly in a specific order the researchers used reward conditioning to motivate the animals if they pressed the levers in the correct sequence they were offered chocolate milk to ensure that there would be no doubt regarding the solidity of the experiments results and that they would be able to identify brain activity patterns related to habit formation rather than anything else the scientists taught the rats different sequences sure enough once the animals had learned to press the levers in the sequence established by their trainers the team noticed the same `` bookending '' pattern in the striatum sets of neurons would fire signals at the beginning and end of a task thus delimitating a `` chunk '' `` i think '' explains graybiel `` this more or less proves that the development of bracketing patterns serves to package up a behavior that the brain and the animals consider valuable and worth keeping in their repertoire '' '' it really is a highlevel signal that helps to release that habit and we think the end signal says the routine has been done '' ann graybiel finally the team also noted the formation of another complementary pattern of activity in a group of inhibitory brain cells called `` interneurons '' in the striatum '' the interneurons '' explains lead study author nuné martiros of harvard university in cambridge ma `` were activated during the time when the rats were in the middle of performing the learned sequence '' she adds that the interneurons `` could possibly be preventing the principal neurons from initiating another routine until the current one was finished '' '' the discovery of this opposite activity by the interneurons '' martiros concludes `` also gets us one step closer to understanding how brain circuits can actually produce this pattern of activity ''eat well for a long and healthy life – thats a mantra that were all familiar with but what are the best foods to help us achieve that goal in this article we give you an overview of some of the most healthful and nutritious foods what are the best foods for a healthful diet we investigate official figures indicate that currently the top three countries in the world with the highest life expectancy are the principality of monaco japan and singapore these are places where the inhabitants experience a high quality of life and an important element of that is eating healthful meals often we find praise for `` superfoods '' in the media – foods so high in nutritional value that they are seen as dietary superheroes nutritionists reject the term `` superfoods '' as a buzzword that can influence people to place too high an expectation on a limited range of foods when in reality a balanced diet and healthful lifestyle require more effort than eating your fiveaday still there are certain foods that are more nutritious than others and many that as research has shown have a protective effect against a range of diseases here we give you an overview of some of the best foods that you may want to consider including in your diet in your quest for a happy healthy life edamame soybeans edamame or fresh soybeans have been a staple of asian cuisine for generations but they have also been gaining popularity on the western front of late soybeans are often sold in snack packs but they are also added to a varied range of dishes from soups to ricebased meals though they are served as cooked and seasoned on their own too edamame and tofu are rich in isoflavones which may have anticancer properties the beans are rich in isoflavones a type of phytoestrogen – that is plantderived estrogenlike substances isoflavones are known to have antiinflammatory antioxidant anticancer and antimicrobial properties thus they can help to regulate the inflammatory response of the body slow down cellular aging fight microbes as well as reportedly protect against certain types of cancer edamame are rich in two types of isoflavones in particular genistein and daidzein a study covered last year on medical news today found that genistein could be used to improve breast cancer treatment in the meantime the study authors note that `` lifetime intake of soy has been linked to reduced risk of breast cancer '' so we may want to include soybeans in our normal diet tofu soybean curd similarly tofu a white cheeselike product made of soybean curds has been linked to a wealth of health benefits for the same reasons tofu is often found cooked in typical eastern asian dishes it can be fried baked or boiled for instance in soups as a soy product it is rich in isoflavones whose health benefits weve outlined above it is also a good source of protein and it contains all the essential amino acids that our bodies need to synthesize protein moreover it is also rich in minerals which our bodies need to keep our teeth and bones strong and healthy and to derive energy tofu is a source of calcium iron manganese selenium phosphorous magnesium zinc and copper some specialists also suggest that eating tofu can make you feel fuller for longer so incorporating it into your meals may help to prevent overeating carrots this common culinary ingredient best known in its orange variety is famously recommended for its high content of betacarotene a pigment and carotenoid that gives the widespread version of this root vegetable its color carrots can protect against agerelated eyesight damage betacarotene can be converted by our bodies into vitamin a which according to the national institutes of health nih `` is involved in immune function vision reproduction and cellular communication '' our bodies can not produce vitamin a on their own so it must be derived from our diet this pigment is also an antioxidant that can protect the cells in our bodies from the aging damage caused by free radicals moreover research has shown that foods rich in carotenoids and of course carrots are a prime example here can protect against agerelated macular degeneration the vision damage caused by old age some varieties of carrots such as white carrots do not contain the orange pigment betacarotene but they do all contain falcarinol a nutrient which some studies claim may have a protective effect against cancer while raw carrots may be best for health as they retain their nutrients there are also ways of cooking carrots that can keep most of their nutrients `` locked in '' in an interview one researcher who investigated the anticancer effect of falcarinol from carrots kirsten brandt from newcastle university in the united kingdom suggests that we may want to boil our carrots whole if we want them cooked but still bursting with nutrients '' chopping up your carrots increases the surface area so more of the nutrients leach out into the water while they are cooked by keeping them whole and chopping them up afterwards you are locking in nutrients and the taste so the carrot is better for you all round '' cruciferous vegetables another important type of food on our list are cruciferous vegetables also known as `` brassica vegetables '' which include a wide array of green foods such as cabbage broccoli brussels sprouts cauliflower bok choy radish and kale cruciferous vegetables can bring a wealth of health benefits these vegetables boast an especially rich nutrient content including many vitamins c e k and folate minerals potassium calcium and selenium and carotenoids lutein betacarotene and zeaxanthin cruciferous vegetables also contain glucosinolates the substances that give these greens their characteristic pungent flavor these substances have been found to bring diverse health benefits some glucosinolates seem to regulate the bodys stress and inflammation response they have antimicrobial properties and some of them are being investigated for their anticancer potential one recent study covered on mnt found that leafy greens including some cruciferous vegetables such as kale and collard greens helped to slow down cognitive decline consequently the study researchers suggest that `` adding a daily serving of green leafy vegetables to your diet may be a simple way to foster your brain health '' kale broccoli and cabbage have also been shown to have a protective effect on heart health thanks to their vitamin k content finally cruciferous vegetables are also a great source of soluble fiber which plays a role in regulating blood sugar levels and diminishing the absorption of fat thus helping to prevent excess weight gain salmon recent studies have suggested that consumption of meat mostly red meat but also some kinds of poultry meat could be harmful to our health in the long run a good alternative for protein in this case is fish and salmon in particular affords many nutritional benefits salmon could protect cognitive health researchers say salmon is packed with protein and also contains plenty of omega3 fatty acids which is said to be beneficial for eyesight research has demonstrated that omega3 protects against dryeye syndrome characterized by insufficient lubrication of the eyes which can lead to soreness and blurred vision moreover omega3 fatty acids have been associated with brain health and research suggests that they can stave off cognitive decline associated with aging salmon also has a high potassium content and according to a new study reported on mnt last autumn potassium can prevent the onset of heart disease additionally this type of fish is rich in the mineral selenium which contributes to the health of the thyroid gland the thyroid gland helps to regulate hormonal activity and is involved in metabolic processes what are the best diets for 2018 learn which diets researchers recommend for a healthy life read now although both farmed and wild salmon are available on the market wild salmon has been found to be more nutritious overall with a higher protein content and also to have less saturated fat which means that it is more healthful and better for weight management however farmed salmon is a more sustainable resource and specialists say that the differences between farmed and wild caught salmon may not be so stark as to motivate us to prefer one type over the other citrus fruits finally citrus fruits are the unsung heroes of a healthful diet these include a number of fruits that are now available worldwide such as oranges grapefruit lemons limes clementines mandarins and tangerines the flavonoids in citrus fruits have been cited in connection to longer lifespans for a long time citrus fruits have been recommended by nutritionists and grandmothers alike for their high content of vitamin c which has antioxidant properties and is said to bring a wide array of health benefits including to reduce inflammatory damage and to fend off infections specialists point out however that this type of fruits goes well beyond just vitamin c when it comes to nutritional content '' the fruits are abundant in other macronutrients including sugars dietary fiber potassium folate calcium thiamin niacin vitamin b6 phosphorus magnesium copper riboflavin and pantothenic acid '' if this list of dietary goodies hasnt colored you impressed the specialists then go on to explain how citrus fruits contain even more organic compounds such as flavonoids coumarins and carotenoids that have been said to have protective effects against cancer cardiovascular diseases and neurodegenerative diseases research has shown that flavonoids in which citrus fruits are particularly rich can `` prevent or delay chronic diseases caused by obesity '' flavonoids have also garnered a lot of scientific attention for their anticancer potential and consumption of especially flavonoidrich citrus fruits has been associated with a significantly prolonged lifespan the inhabitants of the japanese prefecture of okinawa known to be some of the longestliving populations of the world regularly eat shikuwasa also known as `` shequasar '' a citrus fruit typical of the region which contains more flavonoids than most other citrus fruits drinking shikuwasa juice rich in flavonoid content has also been linked to better liver health although all of the foods mentioned above are appreciated for their significant health benefits we should not forget that wellbeing and longevity can not be achieved without a balanced inclusive diet and a healthful lifestyle moreover current studies suggest that our genetic makeup may have an important say as to which foods work best for our health so keeping our list of nutritious foods in mind make sure you follow the healthful diet that is most effective for youwhen it comes to new years resolutions eating better is at the top of our list but which diet plan is the best a panel of health experts on behalf of us news world report reveal the toprated diets for 2018 us news world report reveal the best diets for 2018 it is estimated that around 45 million people in the united states go on a diet each year with weight loss being the primary goal however whether youre dieting to lose weight or simply to improve overall health sticking to a specific eating plan can be challenging with so many diets to choose from how can you tell which one will work for you us news world report put together a panel of health experts every year to evaluate the most popular diets in the us this year the experts assessed 40 diets ranking them from lowest to highest in seven categories including the best diets for weight loss diabetes and heart health so we take a look at some of the key results the best diets for weight loss for the majority of dieters weight loss is the ultimate goal but losing weight and keeping it off is far from easy research suggests that approximately 30–35 percent of weight lost from dieting is regained within 1 year but it is possible to maintain weight loss its just a matter of finding the right eating plan the us news world report panel of experts evaluated 40 popular diets for their effects on both short and longterm weight loss noting that some people want to lose weight quickly while others want to maintain their weight loss for years to come the health experts rated weight watchers as the best diet on both accounts scoring 4 out of 5 for shortterm weight loss and 35 out of 5 for longterm weight loss a highfat diet without the weight gain study says its possible researchers say that there could be a way to avoid weight gain due to a highfat diet read now one of the longestrunning wellknown commercial diets weight watchers incorporates a points system wherein foods and beverages are assigned points based on their nutritional values and dieters are assigned a daily points allowance according to us news world report the expert panel `` appreciated the programs support system which helps dieters keep the pounds off '' the volumetrics diet came in at second place for best weight loss diet scoring 38 out of 5 for shortterm weight loss and 33 out of 5 for longterm weight loss designed by barbara rolls who is a professor of nutrition working at pennsylvania state university in centre county the volumetrics diet focuses on putting foods with lowenergy density such as lowfat milk grains and nonstarchy fruits and vegetables at the forefront of ones diet as well as limiting foods with highenergy density the best diets for heart health heart disease is the leading cause of death for men and women in the us killing around 610000 people in the country every year a poor diet can increase the risk of heart disease because eating food high in fat can lead to high blood pressure high cholesterol levels and obesity which are major risk factors for the condition but which eating plan is best for a healthy heart for this category the health experts analyzed each of the 40 diets and gave them average hearthealth ratings the dietary approaches to stop hypertension dash diet took first place in this category developed by the national heart lung and blood institute a part of the national institutes of health nih the dash diet is high in fruits vegetables whole grains fish poultry and lowfat dairy but it limits foods high in sugar and saturated and trans fats the dash diet was also ranked the best overall diet the mediterranean diet which emphasizes consuming fish and seafood at least twice weekly alongside regular consumption of fruits vegetables legumes and whole grains took joint second place for best hearthealthy diet alongside the ornish diet with the ornish diet fat is limited to 10 percent of daily calories and foods are divided into five groups from the least to most healthful the best diets for diabetes the mediterranean diet not only ranked highly for one of the best hearthealthy diets but it also took the crown for the best diabetes diet scoring 37 out of 5 it is estimated that around 303 million people in the us are living with diabetes wherein blood glucose levels become too high due to the bodys inability to produce or effectively use insulin although eating a healthful diet is important for all of us people with diabetes need to be extra cautious skipping meals or eating the wrong foods may lead to problematic highs and lows in blood glucose levels according to the panel `` the mediterranean diet is a great option for preventing or controlling diabetes some research has shown that diabetics on a mediterranean diet may improve their levels of hemoglobin a1c a measure of blood sugar over time '' the dash diet makes yet another appearance here ranking second in the best diabetes diet category with the experts noting that `` its menu looks a lot like widely accepted nutritional guidelines for those with the condition '' whichever eating plan that you decide is best for you its important to note that physical activity is just as important as the foods you eat current guidelines recommend that adults should engage in at least 150 minutes of moderateintensity or 75 minutes of vigorousintensity aerobic activity every weeka small pilot study of older people suggests that taking a daily supplement of a nutrient that is present naturally in foods may improve artery health and blood pressure a certain type of supplement may promote healthy arterial aging and reduced blood pressure the researchers at the university of colorado boulder found that the supplement called nicotinamide riboside mimics some of the effects of caloric restriction and activates several identical biological pathways studies of caloric restriction which have been done mainly in rodents and fruit flies and not so much in humans indicate that reducing daily calorie intake by a third may delay the aging process and lengthen lifespan the new study found that taking nicotinamide riboside supplements significantly improved blood pressure in people with mild hypertension or elevated blood pressure should the results be confirmed in a larger clinical trial the researchers think that they could have important implications in biomedicine such as increasing treatment options for elevated blood pressure elevated blood pressure and stage 1 high blood pressure are now defined as a blood pressure of 12080 or 13989 millimeters of mercury respectively which although is not high enough to justify medication is high enough to raise the risk for a heart attack or stroke currently the recommended options for people with elevated blood pressure include changes to diet and increasing physical activity senior study author doug seals who is a professor and researcher in the department of integrative physiology and his colleagues report their findings in a paper due to be published in the journal nature communications stiff arteries blood pressure and aging in a western culture stiffer arteries and the high blood pressure that results from them as we age is so common that it is accepted as a normal consequence of aging for example the american heart associations aha explanation of high blood pressure states `` the normal aging process can cause the big elastic arteries to become stiff over time '' in the united states an estimated 103 million adults have high blood pressure and this figure is expected to rise as the population continues to age however there is evidence that stiff arteries and high blood pressure are not necessarily a normal consequence of aging although genetics plays a role preserving artery health as we reach our 70s and beyond also depends on things that we can do something about such as lifestyle and diet nicotinamide riboside nicotinamide riboside is a trace nutrient present in certain foods such as cows milk and in higher concentrations in dietary supplement form studies have indicated that the nutrient contains `` unique properties as a vitamin b3 '' that include raising insulin sensitivity boosting the effects of exercise protecting the brain and resisting the harmful effects of a highfat diet high cholesterol in late life may mean better brain health learn how having a total cholesterol level higher in later life than it was in midlife is linked to a lower risk of marked cognitive decline read now for their study prof seals and his colleagues recruited 24 lean and healthy men and women from the boulder area their ages ranged from 55 to 79 and they were put into two groups one of the groups took 500 milligrams of nicotinamide riboside chloride twice per day for 6 weeks then spent another 6 weeks taking a placebo the other group followed the opposite pattern they took a placebo for 6 weeks and then a twicedaily 500milligram dose of nicotinamide riboside chloride for another 6 weeks the team analyzed blood samples that the subjects gave at the end of each treatment period and they took other `` physiological measurements '' at these times there were no serious side effects an evolutionary survival mechanism the results showed that taking 1000 milligrams of nicotinamide riboside each day increased levels of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide nad+ by 60 percent nad+ is a compound that activates sirtuins a group of enzymes thought to be responsible for the beneficial effects that calorie restriction has on healthy aging and longevity the compound levels of which tend to wane with age is involved in many of the bodys metabolic processes there is a theory which is supported by research that our bodies are programmed by evolution to conserve nad+ when food is scarce and that this is activated when we restrict calorie intake more recent research has also begun to investigate the possibility that older adults might regain this protective property and age more healthily by taking supplements of `` nad+ precursors '' such as nicotinamide riboside the results also found that nicotinamide riboside supplementation caused a drop in systolic blood pressure of 10 points in 13 of the participants who had elevated blood pressure or stage 1 high blood pressure this represents a 25 percent reduction in the risk of having a heart attack more work now needed to confirm findings the researchers conclude that their paper is a step forward in highlighting the potential benefits of nicotinamide riboside supplementation in older adults however they point out that there is still a lot of work to do to confirm that it is safe and effective they hope to investigate the specific impact of nicotinamide riboside on artery health and blood pressure more robustly in a larger clinical trial in the meantime another trial is about to investigate the effect of the supplement in older people with mild cognitive impairment a condition that often precedes alzheimers disease '' this was the first ever study to give this novel compound to humans over a period of time we found that it is welltolerated and appears to activate some of the same key biological pathways that calorie restriction does '' prof doug seals the study was partfunded by chromadex who make the supplements that the researchers usedapps are available for everything these days from shopping to entertainment and travel apps that claim to help look after your mental health and wellbeing are also available so we have selected the best apps for mental health mental health apps may help with conditions such as anxiety and depression as well as enhance psychological wellbeing approximately 483 million adults in the united states are faced with a mental health condition each year and 98 million of those are serious conditions that limit the activities of everyday life among us adults aged 18–44 mood disorders such as depression and bipolar disorder are now the third most common reason for hospitalizations furthermore those who live with severe mental illness are more likely to face chronic medical conditions and die around 25 years earlier exercising regularly and eating a healthful diet can boost mental health and wellbeing significantly help to reduce symptoms of depression anxiety and stress and increase endorphins responsible for happiness apps focus on protecting or improving mental health using methods including meditation hypnosis cognitive behavioral therapy cbt and providing a valuable support network medical news today have put together a list of the top 10 apps that can help to enhance your wellbeing and look after your mental health calm android free iphone free calm was branded as apples `` app of the year '' in 2017 the app is designed to reduce anxiety improve sleep and help you to feel happier calm focuses on the four key areas of meditation breathing sleep and relaxation with the aim of bringing joy clarity and peace to your daily life the app delivers meditations that can help you to destress as well as breathing programs music and sounds from nature to relax your mind and body and promote better sleep calm is the perfect app if you are new to meditation but it also offers programs for more advanced users meditation sessions are available in lengths of 3–25 minutes to fit in with your schedule headspace android free iphone free headspace uses mindfulness and meditation to help you perform at your best each day the apps mission is to provide you with the essential tools to achieve a happier healthier life whether you need to build healthier relationships find a place of calm keep your mind fit or reduce stress headspace has hundreds of themed mindfulness and meditation sessions to support you the app reports that meditation reduces daily stress and improves focus and attention what is more using headspace is suggested to enhance compassionate behavior toward others in just 3 weeks moodnotes iphone $ 399 moodnotes is a thought journal and mood diary the app can be used to capture your feelings and improve your thinking habits through the implementation of cbt and positive psychology track your mood and increase selfawareness of what influences it learn to recognize `` traps '' in your thinking and ways to rethink the situation if you happen to enter a `` thinking trap '' moodnotes will provide suggestions and useful perspectives to reduce stress and enhance wellbeing progress is viewable in the helpful `` insights '' dashboard googleadslotinfopush { '' slotname '' mnt_dlb1 '' slotcontainer '' mnt_dlb1_container } moodpath android free iphone free moodpath is your pocketsized mental health companion whether you are facing a rough patch or have concerns about your mental health the apps goal is to support you through the difficult times and guide you out the other side moodpath asks daily questions in order to assess your wellbeing and screen for symptoms of depression the screening progress aims to increase your awareness of your thoughts emotions and feelings after a period of 2 weeks the app generates an electronic document that you can discuss with a healthcare professional more than 150 videos and psychological exercises are available to help you understand your mood and strengthen your mental health pacifica android free iphone free pacifica is an app with anxiety and stress in mind it provides a toolbox to deal with daily anxiety and stress along with a highly supportive community of likeminded individuals pacifica helps you to break cycles of unhelpful thoughts feelings and behaviors through methods such as cbt mindfulness meditation mood tracking and relaxation the app houses audio lessons and activities that help you to cope with stress and depression and it sets daily challenges to help you tackle anxiety one day at a time and reach your longterm goals superbetter android free iphone free superbetter is a game focusing on increasing resilience and the ability to remain strong optimistic and motivated when presented with challenging obstacles in life a study by the university of pennsylvania in philadelphia found that when people played superbetter for 30 days their mood improved symptoms of anxiety and depression decreased and selfbelief to achieve goals increased the app will help you to adopt new habits improve your skills strengthen relationships complete meaningful projects and achieve lifelong dreams superbetter also has the potential to help you beat depression and anxiety cope with chronic illness and recover from posttraumatic stress disorder ptsd 7 cups android free iphone free if you are feeling lonely sad stressed or worried 7 cups could be the perfect app for you it provides online therapy and emotional support for anxiety and depression there are more than 160000 trained listeners and licensed therapists who are available to anonymously speak with 247 speak your mind and confide in listeners without the fear of being judged these listeners can be searched for based on their experience or their specialties such as bullying panic attacks eating disorders relationship breakups and many more affordable therapy with an online therapist can commence onetoone in a confidential setting anxiety relief hypnosis android free iphone free anxiety relief hypnosis is an app suggested to help improve relaxation and reduce anxiety within just 1–3 weeks of use the apps developers say that hypnosis can decrease anxious thoughts and enhance your response to relaxation which in turn resets your behavior and enables an improved response to stress the app provides an audio session read by a certified hypnotherapist together with calming music and sounds from nature to aid relaxation the `` awaken at end '' feature can be disabled to allow you to fall into restful sleep at bedtime happify android free iphone free happify is a space to overcome negative thoughts and stress and build resilience whether you are feeling stressed anxious or sad happify helps you to regain control of your thoughts and feelings in fact 86 percent of the apps users report feeling better about their lives after 2 months of using it happify employs techniques and evidencebased interventions in the areas of cbt positive psychology and mindfulness to help you break old and unhealthful patterns and form new healthful habits the app offers activities and games to improve your life satisfaction and ability to fight negativity your emotional wellbeing is calculated as a happiness score that you can improve upon each week talkspace android free iphone free talkspace is a counseling and therapy app that connects users with a convenient affordable and confidential way to deal with anxiety stress depression relationship issues and chronic illness a free consultation is provided with a matching agent to identify the ideal therapist for your needs based on several factors more than 1000 licensed therapists are available who specialize in anxiety phobia depression domestic violence ptsd and more after upgrading and becoming a member access is given to a secure chat room wherein you can raise and discuss your worries with your private counselor the apps pricing plans are described as being approximately 80 percent lower than traditional officebased appointments how to be happy in 2018 find out how to maintain your happiness this year read nowcancer is the leading cause of death across the globe for years now researchers have led meticulous studies focused on how to stop this deadly disease in its tracks how close are we to finding more effective treatments how far has cancer research come the world health organization who note that worldwide nearly 1 in 6 deaths are down to cancer in the united states alone the national cancer institute nci estimated 1688780 new cancer cases and 600920 cancerrelated deaths in 2017 currently the most common types of cancer treatment are chemotherapy radiotherapy tumor surgery and in the case prostate cancer and breast cancer hormonal therapy however other types of treatment are beginning to pick up steam therapies that on their own or in combination with other treatments are meant to help defeat cancer more efficiently and ideally have fewer side effects innovations in cancer treatment aim to address a set of issues that will typically face healthcare providers and patients including aggressive treatment accompanied by unwanted side effects tumor recurrence after treatment surgery or both and aggressive cancers that are resilient to widely utilized treatments below we review some of the most recent cancer research breakthroughs that give us renewed hope that better therapies and prevention strategies will soon follow suit boosting the immune systems arsenal one type of therapy that has attracted a lot of attention recently is immunotherapy which aims to reinforce our own bodies existing arsenal against foreign bodies and harmful cells our immune systems response to the spread of cancer tumors but many types of cancer cell are so dangerous because they have ways of `` duping '' the immune system either into ignoring them altogether or else into giving them a `` helping hand '' lung cancer tumor growth halved with new approach to stop cancer from spreading we may have to look at mysterious noncoding molecules a recent study suggests read now therefore some types of aggressive cancer are able to spread more easily and become resistant to chemotherapy or radiotherapy however thanks to in vitro and in vivo experiments researchers are now learning how they might be able to `` deactivate '' the cancer cells protective systems a study published last year in nature immunology found that macrophages or white blood cells that are normally tasked with `` eating up '' cellular debris and other harmful foreign `` objects '' failed to obliterate the superaggressive cancer cells that was because in their interaction with the cancer cells the macrophages read not one but two signals meant to repel their `` cleansing '' action this knowledge however also showed the scientists the way forward by blocking the two relevant signaling pathways they reenabled the white blood cells to do their work therapeutic viruses and innovative vaccines a surprising weapon in the fight against cancer could be therapeutic viruses as revealed by a team from the united kingdom earlier this year in their experiments they managed to use a reovirus to attack brain cancer cells while leaving healthy cells alone '' this is the first time it has been shown that a therapeutic virus is able to pass through the brainblood barrier '' explained the study authors which `` opens up the possibility that this type of immunotherapy could be used to treat more people with aggressive brain cancers '' another area for improvement in immunotherapy is `` dendritic vaccines '' a strategy wherein dendritic cells which play a key role in the bodys immune response are collected from a persons body `` armed '' with tumorspecific antigens which will teach them to `` hunt '' and destroy relevant cancer cells and injected back into the body to boost the immune system in a new study researchers in switzerland identified a way to improve the action of these dendritic vaccines by creating artificial receptors able to recognize and `` abduct '' tiny vesicles that have been linked to cancer tumors spread in the body by attaching these artificial receptors to the dendritic cells in the `` vaccines '' the therapeutic cells are enabled to recognize harmful cancer cells with more accuracy importantly recent studies have shown that immunotherapy may work best if delivered in tandem with chemotherapy specifically if the chemotherapy drugs are delivered first and they are followed up with immunotherapy but this approach does have some pitfalls it is difficult to control the effects of this combined method so sometimes healthy tissue may be attacked alongside cancer tumors however scientists from two institutions in north carolina have developed a substance that once injected into the body becomes gellike a `` bioresponsive scaffold system '' the scaffold can hold both chemotherapy and immunotherapy drugs at once releasing them systematically into primary tumors this method allows for a better control of both therapies ensuring that the drugs act on the targeted tumor alone the nanoparticle revolution speaking of specially developed tools for delivering drugs straight to the tumor and hunting down micro tumors with accuracy and efficiency the past couple of years have seen a `` boom '' in nanotechnology and nanoparticle developments for cancer treatments nanoparticles could be a gamechanger in cancer treatment nanoparticles are microscopic particles that have garnered so much attention in clinical research among other fields because they bring us the chance to develop precise less invasive methods of tackling disease vitally they can target cancer cells or cancer tumors without harming healthy cells in the surrounding environment some nanoparticles have now been created to provide very focused hyperthermic treatment which is a type of therapy that uses hot temperatures to make cancer tumors shrink last year scientists from china and the uk managed to come up with a type of `` selfregulating '' nanoparticle that was able to expose tumors to heat while avoiding contact with healthy tissue '' this could potentially be a gamechanger in the way we treat people who have cancer '' said one of the researchers in charge of this project these tiny vehicles can also be used to target cancer stemlike cells which are undifferentiated cells that have been linked to the resilience of certain types of cancer in the face of traditional treatments such as chemotherapy thus nanoparticles can be `` loaded '' with drugs and set to `` hunt down '' cancer stem cells to prevent the growth or recurrence of tumors scientists have experimented with drugfilled nanoparticles in the treatment of various types of cancer including breast cancer and endometrial cancer no less importantly minuscule vehicles called `` nanoprobes '' can be used to detect the presence of micrometastases which are secondary tumors so tiny that they can not be seen using traditional methods dr steven k libutti director of the rutgers cancer institute of new jersey in new brunswick calls micrometastases `` the achilles heel of surgical management for cancer '' and argues that nanoprobes `` go a long way to solving such problems '' tumor starvation strategies another type of strategy that researchers have been investigating of late is that of `` starving '' tumors of the nutrients they need to grow and spread this scientists point out could be a saving grace in the case of aggressive resilient cancers that can not effectively be eradicated otherwise one novel method of attacking cancer is by starving cancer cells to death three different studies whose results were all published in january this year looked at ways of cutting off cancers nutritional supplies one of these studies looked at ways of stopping glutamine a naturally occurring amino acid from feeding cancer cells certain cancers such as breast lung and colon are known to use this amino acid to support their growth by blocking cancer cells access to glutamine the researchers managed to maximize the impact of oxidative stress a process that eventually induces cell death on these cells some aggressive types of breast cancer may be halted by stopping the cells from `` feeding '' on a particular enzyme that helps them to produce the energy they need to thrive another way of depleting cancer cells of energy is by blocking their access to vitamin b2 as researchers from the university of salford in the uk have observed as one study author says `` this is hopefully the beginning of an alternative approach to halting cancer stem cells '' this strategy could help individuals receiving cancer treatment to avoid the toxic side effects of chemotherapy cancer treatments and epigenetics epigenetics refers to the changes caused in our bodies by alterations in gene expression which dictate whether certain characteristics appear or if certain `` actions '' are affected at a biological level according to research that addressed the impact of such changes many cancers as well as the behaviors of cancer cells are determined by epigenetic factors '' recent advances in the field of epigenetics have shown that human cancer cells harbor global epigenetic abnormalities in addition to numerous genetic alterations '' '' these genetic and epigenetic alterations interact at all stages of cancer development working together to promote cancer progression '' thus it is crucial for specialists to understand when and where to intervene and the expression of which genes they may need to switch on or off depending on their role in the development of cancer one study for instance found that the gene responsible for the advent of huntingtons disease produces a set of molecules whose action may actually prevent cancer from occurring now the researchers challenge is to channel the therapeutic potential of this process without triggering huntingtons disease however the scientists are hopeful '' we believe a shortterm treatment cancer therapy for a few weeks might be possible '' says the studys senior author another recent study was able to establish that estrogenreceptor positive breast cancers that become resistant to chemotherapy gain their resilience through genetic mutations that `` confer a metastatic advantage to the tumor '' but this knowledge also gave researchers the `` break '' that they needed to come up with an improved treatment for such stubborn tumors a combination therapy that delivers the chemotherapeutic drug fulvestrant alongside an experimental enzyme inhibitor what does this all mean cancer research is running at full speed taking advantage of all the technological advances that science has achieved over recent years but what does that mean in terms of coming up with a cure for cancer whether or not there will ever be a cure for all cancer types is currently a matter of strong debate although promising studies are published and covered by the media almost every day cancer types vary immensely this makes it very difficult to say that an approach that works for one type will be adaptable to all also while there is much emerging research promising more effective treatments most of these projects are still in their early stages having conducted in vitro and in vivo experiments some potential treatments still have a long way to go before clinical trials in human patients still that doesnt mean we should lose all hope some researchers explain that these efforts should make us optimistic while we may not be at the stage where we can claim that cancer can easily be eradicated our furthered knowledge and ever more precise tools keep us ahead of the game and improve our odds in the fight against this diseasenew research published in the journal aging finds a compound that stops cancer cells from spreading by starving them of vitamin b2 the findings may revolutionize traditional chemotherapy current chemotherapy has a wide range of serious side effects but that may be about to change suggests new research a team of britishbased researchers set out to find a nontoxic therapeutic agent that targets the mitochondria of cancer cells mitochondria are energyproducing organelles found inside each cell the compound recently found by the scientists can stop cancer stemlike cells from proliferating by interfering with their energycreating process inside the mitochondria the team was led by prof michael lisanti the chair of translational medicine at the university of salford in the united kingdom and the new study can be accessed here starving cancer cells of energy prof lisanti and his colleagues used drugscreening to identify the compound which is called diphenyleneiodonium chloride dpi as the researchers explain various cell assays and other cell culture experiments revealed that dpi reduced over 90 percent of the energy produced in the cells mitochondria dpi achieved this by blocking vitamin b2 also known as riboflavin which depleted the cells of energy '' our observation is that dpi is selectively attacking the cancer stem cells by effectively creating a vitamin deficiency in other words by turning off energy production in cancer stem cells we are creating a process of hibernation '' prof michael lisanti the cancer stem cells are the ones that produce the tumor `` its extraordinary '' continues prof lisanti `` the cells just sit there as if in a state of suspended animation '' importantly dpi proved to be nontoxic for socalled `` bulk '' cancer cells which are largely thought to be nontumorigenic is chemo at the heart of cancer regrowth paradoxically the very treatment that is supposed to stop cancer from spreading sometimes enables it to do so read now this suggests that the compound might be successful where current chemotherapy fails the team explains `` dpi treatment can be used to acutely confer a mitochondrialdeficient phenotype which we show effectively depletes cancer stemlike cells from the heterogeneous cancer cell population '' '' these findings have significant therapeutic implications for potently targeting cancer stemlike cells while minimizing toxic side effects '' they add a new era of chemotherapy '' we believe '' say the scientists `` that dpi is one of the most potent and highly selective cancer stemlike cells inhibitors discovered to date '' the findings are particularly significant given the dire need for nontoxic cancer therapies and the serious side effects of conventional chemotherapy '' the beauty of dpi is that it makes the cancer stem cells metabolically inflexible so that they will be highly susceptible to many other drugs '' explains prof lisanti study coauthor prof federica sotgia also comments on the significance of the recent findings saying `` in terms of chemotherapies for cancer we clearly need something better than what we have at present and this is hopefully the beginning of an alternative approach to halting cancer stem cells '' in fact the authors specialize in finding alternative nontoxic therapies and they hope that their most recent findings will mark the beginning of a new era of chemotherapy perhaps one that uses nontoxic molecules to target the mitochondrial activity of cancer stemlike cells the researchers propose to call these new molecules `` mitoflavoscins ''periods usually arrive once each month but the exact date flow cramp severity and accompanying symptoms are not quite that consistent for this very reason the app market is flooded with period trackers that aim to offer insight into your monthly cycle period tracking apps can help you to learn more about your cycle and plan for future periods bleeding occurs every 28 days for the majority of women but it is common for the menstrual cycle to be either shorter or longer in duration and for bleeding to start anywhere from day 21 to day 40 period length may also vary and last for 3–8 days with an average of 5 days bleeding is often heaviest on days 1 and 2 and starts to become lighter thereafter tracking your period can be useful for several reasons period tracking can help you to get to know your own body and cycle and observe any symptoms such as mood swings or headaches that may occur during a particular phase of your cycle period tracking can help to identify any changes to your menstrual cycle that may be an indicator of potential health issues furthermore using period tracking apps can tell you when you are likely to be most fertile if you are avoiding pregnancy or trying to become pregnant there are hundreds of apps that track and analyze the menstrual cycle so how do you know which one is the best fit for you medical news today have tried and tested apps galore to bring you a selection of the top 10 apps to start tracking your period today period calendar android free iphone free period calendar can help to track and predict your period plus provide information on your fertile window and potential ovulation date in addition to the basic menstrual cycle tracking function the app can be used to record temperature intercourse birth control weight cervical mucus mood and any other symptoms the pill reminder ensures that you will never forget a dose ever again whether you need to remember to take medications supplements birth control pills or even an injection the pill tracker can be set up to remind you flo period tracker android free iphone free if you are wondering when you last had a period or would like to know when your next one is due you can easily find out using flo flo uses machine learning to accurately and reliably predict menstruation and ovulation using the apps bold and simple calendar you will be able to log how you are feeling your symptoms sex drive and menstruation flow the app can also be used to track sleep water consumption and physical activity the insights dashboard helps you to learn more about your body and cycle and it also provides personalized health insights each day clue android free iphone free clue has been ranked as the top period and ovulation tracking app by the obstetrics gynecology journal which is a publication of the american college of obstetricians and gynecologists clue uses science to help its users to identify unique patterns in their menstrual cycle with the apps period tracker multiple mood trackers health logs and exercise trackers your health and menstrual cycle will no longer be a mystery the developers promise to be inclusive of all ages and never use butterflies flowers euphemisms or pink the apps unique algorithm learns from the data that you add which means that the more you use clue the smarter it will become my calendar android free iphone free my calendar is a sophisticated elegant and very customizable period tracker it can help those with irregular cycles as well as people who have worries about conceiving birth control and contraception with my calendar you can track regular and irregular periods temperature weight moods symptoms and blood flow with its discreet reminders you can be prepared for approaching periods along with ovulation and fertile days you can access all your essential information using the health tracker at a glance and the calendar can be passwordprotected to ensure that your information remains private glow android free iphone free glow can track your period and record your symptoms mood sexual activity and medications glows datadriven menstrual and ovulation calculator helps women to take control of their reproductive health the app can forecast periods and ovulation and its predictions become smarter over time not only can the app help women who are avoiding or attempting pregnancy but it also helps those who are undergoing fertility treatments such as intrauterine insemination and in vitro fertilization you can make charts of your menstrual and fertility data set medication birth control and ovulation reminders as well as log more than 40 different health signals glow also offers a subscription to unlock comparative insights premium articles private messaging and premium support eve android free iphone free eve is a savvy period tracker that predicts upcoming periods and your chances of pregnancy discover trends in your cycle by logging your moods and symptoms and view your health data in eyecatching charts with eve you can review past periods forecast future periods and ovulation and visualize your cycle history in a new way with eves interactive staircase the app provides access to a community where you can discuss periods sex and health if you are concerned about anything at all ask the community no subject is off limits and you can learn from those who have had similar experiences period tracker lite android free iphone free the period tracker lite app makes logging menstrual cycles quick and easy press a button at the start of each period and period tracker lite will record your data and use the average of 3 months worth of data to calculate your next period take notes each day about your symptoms such as flow cramps bloating backache headache and tender breasts your weight temperature and a choice of more than 30 moods can also be selected period dates fertility days and ovulation are all shown in a simple monthview calendar the app provides comprehensive charts that illustrate weight changes temperature period length cycle length and symptoms period plus iphone free period plus can help you to keep in touch with the duration of your menstrual cycles and tells you when the next one will begin the app sends you reminders of your next period and fertile window helping you to get to know your cycle and plan ahead with birth control pregnancy planning and even vacations period plus tracks period duration and intensity cramp intensity breast tenderness breakouts migraines basal body temperature cervical mucus sexual activity exercise pregnancy test results sleep patterns and more my cycles android free iphone free regardless of whether you are trying to conceive or become an expert on when your next period is due my cycles can help my cycles tracks periods in a handy calendar and predicts future ones wherever you are you can track your period symptoms mood and medications with my cycles in an instant record your periods view them at a glance with the easytoread calendar and plan periods fertile days and ovulation for the next 12 months if you are trying to get pregnant the app lets you know when your chances of conceiving are higher with helpful reminders likewise it tells you when to use extra protection if you are not trying to conceive cycles iphone free the cycles app is a simple period and fertility tracker that requires little input irrespective of having regular or irregular periods with cycles all you need to do is turn the dial on the first day of your period and thats it the app automatically adjusts your cycle length cycles is designed so that you can invite your partner to the app to keep up with your cycle this feature is useful so that your partner can provide emotional support plan trips and romantic evenings and know when your most fertile days are if you are trying to conceive the app uses scientifically backed fertility tracking that predicts fertility with an accuracy of up to 95 percent optional password protection keeps your information secure from prying eyes seven tips for relieving period bloating here are some tips about how to relieve periodrelating bloating read nowwant to get fit this year but dont know where to start we have chosen the best fitness blogs to empower you and help to get you started on your journey to tiptop physical fitness fitness blogs aim to inspire empower and motivate you to reach your health and fitness goals getting up off the couch and taking part in regular physical activity is one of the most important things you can do to ensure you remain healthy regular exercise can help to control your weight strengthen your bones and muscles and reduce your risk of cardiovascular disease type 2 diabetes and some cancers furthermore being active improves your mood mental health mobility and ability to complete tasks as an older adult as well as increases your chances of living longer adults are recommended to do at least 150 minutes of moderateintensity physical activity each week to achieve substantial health benefits and increase to 300 minutes for more extensive benefits if you are stuck on where to begin or are worried about getting injured the good news is that aerobic activity such as brisk walking is considered to be safe for most people hundreds of fitness blogs are also available to help you on your way and provide tips ideas and information on the best types of activity to boost fitness and instructions on how to do them medical news today have trawled through the many fitness blogs out there to bring you the top 10 fitness blogs for 2018 myfitnesspal blog myfitnesspal is a smartphone app and website that records physical activity and diet the app works out the optimal intake of calories and nutrients for the user to accomplish their goals and it uses elements of gaming to motivate them myfitnesspals blog focuses on providing easytoread information on eating psychology nutrition weight loss fitness inspiration workout guides and motivational support through the victory stories on the blog fitness posts include seven tips to lift weights without causing injury songs that should feature on your 2018 running playlist and brain and bodyboosting moves that you should add to your next walk visit the myfitnesspal blog natalie jill fitness natalie jill fitness was founded after natalie jill gained weight straight after losing her house retiring and ending her marriage she turned her life around and in the process became an inspiration to others natalie specializes in fitness weight loss healthy lifestyles and body weight training natalie coaches motivates and empowers people to stop making excuses and instead make solutions to become the best version of themselves recent posts on her blog include a bootybuilding workout to activate your glutes an upper body workout using just your body weight and how to do a chin up visit the natalie jill fitness blog ace ace is an acronym for the american council on exercise ace are a nonprofit organization that certifiy exercise professionals and health coaches aces vision is to get people moving and provide scientifically backed education to fitness professionals and health enthusiasts to make an impact on preventable diseases related to inactivity by 2035 their expert articles cover fitness topics such as exercises to improve agility lower body exercises to complete instead of doing squats and the many types of strength and their benefits visit the ace blog born fitness adam bornstein developed born fitness with the aim of taking the stress out of health nutrition and fitness whether you hope to lose weight gain muscle eat more healthfully or live longer born fitness provide solutions to fit your needs the born fitness team will help you to identify the diets strategies exercises and workouts that are best suited to you so that you can apply them to your life achieve your goals and live stronger and longer activities are available on the blog to suit all levels of fitness from beginner to advanced training posts include how to incorporate resistance bands into your routine preventing knee back and shoulder injuries during your workouts and the truth about the 7minute workout visit the born fitness blog the fitnessista the fitnessista is a healthy lifestyle blog written by gina harney who is a fitness instructor personal trainer and weight loss specialist based in san diego ca gina is a mom of two and she shares snippets of her family life on the blog along with quick effective workouts and healthful recipes that are super speedy to put together the latest posts on the fitnessista include things to help with fitness motivation the barre hiit workout that you can practice anywhere and a strength and cardio workout that can be completed on a park bench visit the fitnessista blog suzanne bowen fitness suzanne bowen compiled all of the training that she had received and given over the course of 16 years and created suzanne bowen fitness suzanne is also the creator of barreamped which is an internationally taught barre fitness technique regardless of whether you havent exercised for a while or if you are a seasoned expert suzanne has workouts that range from 10 minutes to over an hour that are effective for everyone the blog provides challenges and workouts to boost your fitness levels such as the crunchless abs workout a light weight routine for the upper body and a rebounding workout and its benefits visit the suzanne bowen fitness blog knockedup fitness erica ziel is a mother of three and the founder of knockedup fitness erica is a personal trainer and expert for fitnessinfused pilates with more than 10 years experience training numerous clients erica is an expert in prenatal and postnatal training and teaching women how to strengthen their core muscles for an easier pregnancy delivery and recovery the knockedup fitness blog delivers real and relevant topics to the busy mom or momtobe with articles such as why its important to properly strengthen your core how to prevent and relieve back pain during pregnancy and how movement can prepare your body for birth visit the knockedup fitness blog lisa gulley established workout mommy in 2007 to provide health and fitness information for moms lisa says that as a mom of four boys she is fully aware of how being a mom requires you to look after someone other than yourself 247 and that finding the time to exercise is a challenge lisa aims to provide the inspiration motivation and ideas you need to fit fitness exercise and health into your busy schedule and keep your sanity in check posts on workout mommy include ways to overcome a negative mindset tips on how to start a fitness routine and the types of cardio exercises that are best for women visit the workout mommy blog love sweat fitness katie dunlop is a certified personal trainer group fitness instructor and the creator of love sweat fitness she started love sweat fitness with the aim of inspiring women all over the world to find their happy and healthy body after college katie found herself overweight by 45 pounds and was fed up with trendy workouts and fad diets she decided to take her fitness and health into her own hands lost her excess weight and identified her true passion for helping women to reach their goals inspiring posts on katies blog include ways to make your morning workout the best part of your day five tips for a happier and healthier you this year and how to train for a 10k run visit the love sweat fitness blog nerd fitness nerd fitness say that they are a community of misfits mutants and underdogs that are ready to help you on your fitness journey whether you are overweight and frustrated in danger of serious health issues want to become a healthier parent or just want to look after or feel better about yourself nerd fitness aim to help you to make small changes so that you can live a happier healthier and more fulfilling life blog posts include the main differences between weight loss success and failure the number of calories you burn while walking and how to get strong like logan with the wolverine workout visit the nerd fitness blog the 10 best fitness apps pair these blogs with the apps listed here to boost your chances of becoming fit and healthy read nowa new study may have revealed a possible new prevention and treatment strategy for osteoarthritis which is one of the most common and debilitating agerelated diseases in the united states researchers suggest that increasing levels of foxo proteins could be one way to prevent and treat osteoarthritis researchers at the scripps research institute tsri in san diego ca reveal that proteins called foxo are key for joint health by boosting the levels of these foxo proteins they believe that it might be possible to treat osteoarthritis or even stop the disease from developing senior study author dr martin lotz from the department of molecular medicine at tsri and his team recently reported their results in the journal science translational medicine osteoarthritis also referred to as degenerative joint disease is estimated to affect more than 30 million adults in the united states making it the most common type of arthritis the condition is characterized by a breakdown of cartilage which is the tissue that cushions the joints of the bones osteoarthritis most commonly affects the knee hip and hand joints in a previous study dr lotz and team found that foxo levels in joint cartilage are reduced for this latest study the researchers sought to find out more about how foxo proteins affect joint health the effects of foxo deficiency in mice the researchers reached their findings by studying mice that were lacking foxo proteins in their joint cartilage compared with control mice the scientists found that foxodeficient mice experienced degeneration of the joints at a significantly younger age what is more the rodents with foxo deficiency showed greater susceptibility to cartilage damage during a treadmill test and they were also more likely to develop posttraumatic osteoarthritis due to knee injury osteoarthritis could this algae extract lead to a cure researchers reveal how an algae extract may offer a cure for osteoarthritis read now upon further investigation the scientists found that the foxodeficient mice showed abnormalities in a process called autophagy which is a natural process by which cells get rid of any unwanted or damaged components in order to maintain their health and carry out any repairs foxo deficiency also led to abnormalities in the processes that protect our cells against damage caused by free radicals additionally the study revealed that mice lacking foxo proteins failed to produce the required levels of a protein called lubricin which helps to protect joint cartilage against wear and tear the reduced production of lubricin was linked to a reduction in healthy cells in the `` superficial zone '' which is a layer of cartilage in the knee joint boosting foxo may prevent osteoarthritis so why does foxo cause these issues the researchers found that foxo proteins regulate the expression of genes that are important for joint health including those that control inflammation and autophagy the absence of foxo proteins in the joint cartilage leads to an increase in inflammation and a decrease in autophagy meaning that cells are unable to repair any damage '' the housekeeping mechanisms which keep cells healthy were not working in these knockout mice '' says dr lotz for the final part of their study the scientists wanted to see whether boosting foxo levels could restore these `` housekeeping mechanisms '' by increasing foxo expression in cells taken from people with osteoarthritis the researchers were able to normalize the expression of genes associated with inflammation and autophagy and the production of lubricin was also restored the team now plans to create molecules that can increase foxo levels and assess their effects in experimental osteoarthritis models '' drugs that boost the expression and activity of foxo could be a strategy for preventing and treating osteoarthritis '' dr martin lotzaccording to the national institutes of health people have used marijuana or cannabis to treat their ailments for at least 3000 years however the food and drug administration have not deemed marijuana safe or effective in the treatment of any medical condition although cannabidiol a substance that is present in marijuana received approval in june 2018 as a treatment for some types of epilepsy marijuana is being increasingly legalized in the us but is it safe this tension between a widespread belief that marijuana is an effective treatment for a wide assortment of ailments and a lack of scientific knowledge on its effects has been somewhat exacerbated in recent times by a drive toward legalization twentynine states plus the district of columbia have now made marijuana available for medical and in some states recreational purposes a recent study published in the journal addiction also found that use of marijuana is increasing sharply across the united states although this rise may not be linked to the legalization of marijuana in participating states nevertheless this rise in use is prompting major public health concerns in this article we look at the scientific evidence weighing the medical benefits of marijuana against its associated health risks in an attempt to answer this simple question is marijuana good or bad what are the medical benefits of marijuana over the years research has yielded results to suggest that marijuana may be of benefit in the treatment of some conditions these are listed below chronic pain last year a large review from the national academies of sciences engineering and medicine assessed more than 10000 scientific studies on the medical benefits and adverse effects of marijuana one area that the report looked closely at was the use of medical marijuana to treat chronic pain chronic pain is a leading cause of disability affecting more than 25 million adults in the us the review found that marijuana or products containing cannabinoids which are the active ingredients in marijuana or other compounds that act on the same receptors in the brain as marijuana are effective at relieving chronic pain alcoholism and drug addiction another comprehensive review of evidence published last year in the journal clinical psychology review revealed that using marijuana may help people with alcohol or opioid dependencies to fight their addictions but this finding may be contentious the national academies of sciences review suggests that marijuana use actually drives increased risk for abusing and becoming dependent on other substances also the more that someone uses marijuana the more likely they are to develop a problem with using marijuana individuals who began using the drug at a young age are also known to be at increased risk of developing a problem with marijuana use depression posttraumatic stress disorder and social anxiety the review published in clinical psychology review assessed all published scientific literature that investigated the use of marijuana to treat symptoms of mental illness evidence to date suggests that marijuana could help to treat some mental health conditions its authors found some evidence supporting the use of marijuana to relieve depression and posttraumatic stress disorder symptoms that being said they caution that marijuana is not an appropriate treatment for some other mental health conditions such as bipolar disorder and psychosis the review indicates that there is some evidence to suggest that marijuana might alleviate symptoms of social anxiety but again this is contradicted by the national academies of sciences engineering and medicine review which instead found that regular users of marijuana may actually be at increased risk of social anxiety cancer evidence suggests that oral cannabinoids are effective against nausea and vomiting caused by chemotherapy and some small studies have found that smoked marijuana may also help to alleviate these symptoms alcohol more damaging to brain health than marijuana a recent study suggests that alcohol may cause more harm to the brain than marijuana read now some studies on cancer cells suggest that cannabinoids may either slow down the growth of or kill some types of cancer however early studies that tested this hypothesis in humans revealed that although cannabinoids are a safe treatment they are not effective at controlling or curing cancer multiple sclerosis the shortterm use of oral cannabinoids may improve symptoms of spasticity among people with multiple sclerosis but the positive effects have been found to be modest epilepsy in june 2018 the food and drug administration fda approved the use of a medication containing cannabidiol cbd to treat two rare severe and specific types of epilepsy called lennoxgastaut syndrome and dravet syndrome that are difficult to control with other types of medication this cbdbased drug is known as epidiolex cbd is one of many substances that occurs in cannabis it is not psychoactive the drug for treating these conditions involves a purified form of cbd the approval was based on the findings of research and clinical trials a study published in 2017 found that the use of cbd resulted in far fewer seizures among children with dravet syndrome compared with a placebo dravet syndrome seizures are prolonged repetitive and potentially lethal in fact 1 in 5 children with dravet syndrome do not reach the age of 20 years in the study 120 children and teenagers with dravet syndrome all of whom were aged between 2 and 18 were randomly assigned to receive an oral cbd solution or a placebo for 14 weeks along with their usual medication the researchers found that the children who received the cbd solution went from having around 12 seizures per month to an average of six seizures per month three children receiving cbd did not experience any seizures at all children who received the placebo also saw a reduction in seizures but this was slight their average number of seizures went down from 15 each month before the study to 14 seizures per month during the study the researchers say that this 39 percent reduction in seizure occurrence provides strong evidence that the compound can help people living with dravet syndrome and that their paper has the first rigorous scientific data to demonstrate this however the study also found a high rate of side effects linked to cbd more than 9 in 10 of the children treated with cbd experienced side effects most commonly vomiting fatigue and fever the patient information leaflet for epidiolex warns of side effects such as liver damage sedation and thoughts of suicide what are the health risks of marijuana at the other end of the spectrum is the plethora of studies that have found negative associations between marijuana use and health they are listed below mental health problems daily marijuana use is believed to exacerbate existing symptoms of bipolar disorder among people who have this mental health problem however the national academies of sciences engineering and medicine report suggests that among people with no history of the condition there is only limited evidence of a link between marijuana use and developing bipolar disorder moderate evidence suggests that regular marijuana users are more likely to experience suicidal thoughts and there is a small increased risk of depression among marijuana users marijuana use is likely to increase risk of psychosis including schizophrenia but a curious finding among people with schizophrenia and other psychoses is that a history of marijuana use is linked with improved performance on tests assessing learning and memory testicular cancer although there is no evidence to suggest any link between using marijuana and an increased risk for most cancers the national academies of sciences did find some evidence to suggest an increased risk for the slowgrowing seminoma subtype of testicular cancer respiratory disease regular marijuana smoking is linked to increased risk of chronic cough but `` it is unclear '' whether smoking marijuana worsens lung function or increases the risk of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or asthma a 2014 study that explored the relationship between marijuana use and lung disease suggested that it was plausible that smoking marijuana could contribute to lung cancer though it has been difficult to conclusively link the two the authors of that study published in the journal current opinion in pulmonary medicine conclude '' there is unequivocal evidence that habitual or regular marijuana smoking is not harmless a caution against regular heavy marijuana usage is prudent '' '' the medicinal use of marijuana is likely not harmful to lungs in low cumulative doses '' they add `` but the dose limit needs to be defined recreational use is not the same as medicinal use and should be discouraged '' so is marijuana good or bad for your health there is evidence that demonstrates both the harms and health benefits of marijuana yet despite the emergence over the past couple of years of very comprehensive uptodate reviews of the scientific studies evaluating the benefits and harms of the drug its clear that more research is needed to fully determine the public health implications of rising marijuana use more research is needed to confirm the harms and benefits of marijuana use many scientists and health bodies including the american cancer society acs support the need for further scientific research on the use of marijuana and cannabinoids to treat medical conditions however there is an obstacle to this marijuana is classed as a schedule i controlled substance by the drug enforcement administration which deters the study of marijuana and cannabinoids through its imposition of strict conditions on the researchers working in this area if you happen to live in a state where medical use of marijuana is legal you and your doctor will need to carefully consider these factors and how they relate to your illness and health history before using this drug for instance while there is some evidence to support the use for marijuana for pain relief you should certainly avoid marijuana if you have a history of mental health problems remember to always speak to your doctor before taking a new medicinewith so many diet types to choose from how do we know which one will suit us best one problem that may face us is deciding whether to go lowfat or lowcarb what does research have to say about it one of the most difficult decisions when it comes to weight loss diets is picking one that will work well for you keto diets mediterranean diets fasting diets there are so many options out there for people who want to lose weight however choosing a diet is tricky how do we know which one will work best for us or if the diet will work at all researchers at the stanford university school of medicine in california have recently conducted a study exploring one key aspect of this `` best diet '' question whether lowfat or lowcarb diets are more effective what lead study author prof christopher gardner and colleagues found however might only make the matter more complicated '' weve all heard stories '' says prof gardner `` of a friend who went on one diet it worked great and then another friend tried the same diet and it didnt work at all its because were all very different and were just starting to understand the reasons for this diversity '' '' maybe we shouldnt be asking whats the best diet but whats the best diet for whom '' prof christopher gardner prof gardner and team worked with 609 people aged 18–50 with an almost 5050 maletofemale ratio the participants were split into two groups and randomly assigned one of two diets lowcarb or lowfat all of the study participants followed their assigned diet for a full year the results of the researchers study are now published in the journal jama opt for natural foods in order to gain a better understanding of the factors that might drive weight gain and weight loss prof gardner and team also sequenced the participants genomes in doing so they looked for gene patterns that they could associate with the effectiveness fat or carb metabolism another test measured all the subjects insulin levels which have previously been associated with weight gain in some people cant keep the weight off this may be why why are our bodies so stubborn when it comes to weight management a new study sheds light read now for the first 8 weeks of their respective diets the participants were instructed to consume no more than 20 grams of either fats or carbs per day this the authors explain would be the equivalent of one and a half slices of wholewheat bread for carbs or a large handful of nuts in the case of fats from the second month of their diet onward the participants were allowed to make adjustments as needed adding back 5 –15 grams of either carbs or fat little by little the purpose of these adjustments was to encourage the participants to strike a nutritional balance that they would be comfortable adhering to in the long run beyond the `` confines '' of the study '' we wanted them to choose '' says prof gardner `` a lowfat or lowcarb diet plan that they could potentially follow forever rather than a diet that theyd drop when the study ended '' as the year drew to a close those who had been following a lowfat diet had a daily fat intake of 57 grams on average compared with 87 grams per day before the start of the study those on a lowcarb diet had a daily carb intake of approximately 132 grams versus 247 grams before the study started participants lost an average of 13 pounds over the 1year period the scientists were pleased with the impact that the study had on the participants dietary health stressing that one of its main achievements was to encourage them to switch to healthful sources of fats and carbs '' we made sure to tell everybody '' adds prof gardner `` regardless of which diet they were on to go to the farmers market and dont buy processed convenience food also we advised them to diet in a way that didnt make them feel hungry or deprived '' study opens the door to further questions after measuring participants baseline insulin levels and weight loss progress throughout the study the researchers saw that although they had all transitioned to more healthful eating habits there was still a lot of individual variance when it came to weight loss thus while some participants lost more than 60 pounds others gained 15–20 pounds however the researchers were unable to find any links between gene patterns or insulin output and a persons likelihood of thriving on a lowfat versus lowcarb diet '' this study closes the door on some questions but it opens the door to others we have gobs of data that we can use in secondary exploratory studies '' prof gardner notes the researchers next step from here therefore will be to look at all the different data collected throughout the current study and try to understand how individual dietary needs might be calculated in the future '' i still think there is an opportunity to discover some personalization to it now we just need to work on tying the pieces together '' says prof gardner in the meantime the researchers encourage people on a weight loss journey to just be more mindful about what they eat since that will be the first step to a more healthful lifestyle '' on both sides referring to lowcarb and lowfat dieters we heard from people who had lost the most weight that we had helped them change their relationship to food and that now they were more thoughtful about how they ate '' prof gardner concludesintermittent fasting has been gaining popularity among people looking to shed extra kilograms and maintain a healthy weight researchers argue that this type of diet may also slow down aging and disease intermittent fasting can help with weight management but might it also bring other health benefits in intermittent fasting what essentially takes place in the body is that one source of energy which can facilitate the accumulation of body fat is switched for another our bodies run on glucose or simple sugar but when we fast for a longer period of time that energy source becomes unavailable our system needs to identify a different kind of `` fuel '' that is when the body begins to convert certain types of body fat into fatty acids which are easily absorbed by the blood fatty acids in turn produce molecules called ketones which the body uses as its new source of energy stephen anton a researcher at the university of florida college of medicine in gainesville calls this process `` flipping the metabolic switch '' '' this switch '' explains anton `` can happen after a certain period of time fasting its a gradation in which your metabolism over time shifts to use higher and higher amounts of ketones for energy '' he and his team were interested to learn more about how this switch occurs and whether it could bring other health benefits alongside weight management for this purpose they reviewed numerous recent studies focused on the mechanisms and benefits of intermittent fasting the teams review published in the journal obesity suggests that intermittent fasting may be more healthful than other dieting strategies as ketones put less stress on cells than the byproducts of other dieting styles significant weight loss regardless of style anton and his colleagues explain that the switch usually begins to take place after 8–12 hours of fasting though in the case of individuals who practice intermittent fasting the fasting strategies vary the researchers focused on the two most common types of intermittent fasting diets the first of which is based on time restrictions for eating in it the dieter may fast for a number of hours per day for instance 16 hours while allowing themselves to eat anything theyd like over the remaining hours how intermittent fasting can increase weight loss how does intermittent fasting work read now for the second type of intermittent fasting dieters may choose to alternate days of total fasting with days when no food is off limits or they may simply alternate days of frugal eating when individuals limit themselves to foods that equal only about 500 calories in all with days of unrestricted eating or `` feasting days '' `` of course '' anton notes `` we recommend healthy food during the feasting times '' the teams review of existing studies revealed that all in all any type of intermittent fasting diets are associated with significant weight loss in all 10 clinical trials assessing the effects of alternateday fasting the results conclusively pointed to this strategys effectiveness when it came to shedding extra kilos and 3 out of the 4 studies focused on the restricted timing type of intermittent fasting had similar results '' so in my mind its not a question of whether it works for producing fat loss '' says anton whats more interesting and more important is what kind of tissue is lost through intermittent fasting additional potential health benefits most of the studies reviewed by anton and team revealed that while participants did lose body fat no significant amount of lean tissue which includes organ tissue muscular tissue and bone tissue was lost this is important since lean tissue allows our bodies to keep on functioning well and other types of dieting strategies anton notes lead to significant loss of both fat and lean tissue which may affect health in the long run studies into the effect of the switch from glucosedriven energy to ketonedriven energy in rodents and other animals suggests that intermittent fasting could also have other health benefits the scientists say the researchers say that it could help to prolong the lifespan improve the functioning of metabolic processes protect cognitive function enhance physical performance reduce harmful instances of inflammation and shield against cardiovascular diseases '' an important takeaway is that we all have the ability to switch our metabolism from glucose to ketone utilization and that switch has the potential to have profound health benefits for us in addition to the positive changes in body composition '' stephen anton still the authors warn against starting intermittent fasting without first asking for a doctors advice this dieting style may not be equally beneficial for everyone and in some cases it could do more harm than good he cautionsemerging evidence suggests that a `` potent '' drug could prevent the development of alzheimers disease but only if a person takes the medication long before symptoms of this condition make an appearance an existing drug may be able to stop alzheimers onset researchers say alzheimers disease is the most common form of dementia according to the centers for disease control and prevention cdc an estimated 57 million adults in the united states live with this condition unfortunately there is no cure for alzheimers and following disease onset symptoms tend to worsen progressively then the question `` can specialists prevent the disease in people deemed at increased risk '' arises the authors of a new study from the university of virginia in charlottesville suggest that one drug called memantine which is currently used to manage alzheimers symptoms may actually help prevent the disease this however might only happen if a person takes the drug before symptoms set in '' based on what weve learned so far it is my opinion that we will never be able to cure alzheimers disease by treating patients once they become symptomatic '' says prof george bloom of the university of virginia who oversaw the study '' the best hope for conquering this disease is to first recognize patients who are at risk and begin treating them prophylactically with new drugs and perhaps lifestyle adjustments that would reduce the rate at which the silent phase of the disease progresses '' he says adding `` ideally we would prevent it from starting in the first place '' the journal alzheimers dementia has now published the teams findings the cell cycle reentry process the researchers explain that alzheimers disease actually begins long before symptoms start to show perhaps even a decade or longer in advance one of the conditions characteristics is that once affected by the disease brain cells attempt to divide possibly in order to balance out the death of other neurons only to die anyway in any case the further division of fully formed brain cells is unusual and does not happen in a healthy brain the affected neurons attempt at division is called the `` cell cycle reentry process '' '' its been estimated that as much as 90 percent of neuron death that occurs in the alzheimers brain follows this cell cycle reentry process which is an abnormal attempt to divide '' explains prof bloom more potent alzheimers therapy is on its way recent advances in alzheimers research are speeding up the process of designing better therapies read now '' by the end of the course of the disease the patient will have lost about 30 percent of the neurons in the frontal lobes of the brain '' he estimates study coauthor erin kodis prof blooms former doctoral student formed her own hypothesis about what triggers this mechanism excess calcium she believes enters neurons through special receptors called nmda receptors on the cells surface this drives brain cells to start dividing following a series of laboratory experiments kodis confirmed that her hypothesis was correct this mechanism is set in motion before the formation of amyloid plaques which are characteristic of alzheimers disease in the brain eventually however molecules of an amino acid called beta amyloid stick together to form toxic amyloid plaques memantine may have potent properties kodis saw that when neurons encounter beta amyloid molecules in the early stages that precede plaque buildup nmda receptors open to receive the excess calcium that ultimately leads to their destruction but then the researcher made another discovery the drug memantine prevented cell cycle reentry by closing the nmda receptors on the surface of neurons '' the experiments suggest that memantine might have potent diseasemodifying properties if it could be administered to patients long before they have become symptomatic and diagnosed with alzheimers disease '' prof george bloom '' perhaps this could prevent the disease or slow its progression long enough that the average age of symptom onset could be significantly later if it happens at all '' prof bloom adds these findings are particularly promising memantine has few known side effects and those that have been reported are rare and do not have a major impact on an individuals wellbeing prof bloom believes that in the future a useful preventive approach might be to screen people for telling signs that they are exposed to alzheimers as early as possible specialists could then prescribe memantine to those at an increased risk of the disease he says people may have to take the drug throughout their lives to keep alzheimers at bay or at least in check '' i dont want to raise false hopes '' says prof bloom however he continues `` if this idea of using memantine as a prophylactic pans out it will be because we now understand that calcium is one of the agents that gets the disease started and we may be able to stop or slow the process if done very early '' currently prof bloom and colleagues are planning a clinical trial to test the preventive strategy that they outlined in the studyfor many cancers diagnosis is a long and challenging process a new blood test however could offer a muchneeded simpler and more effective diagnostic technique called cancerseek it has the potential to identify eight cancer types from one blood sample researchers have created a blood test that could detect eight cancer types in the new study researchers reveal how the blood test demonstrated high sensitivity and specificity for cancer detection in more than 1000 people with the disease the team from the johns hopkins university school of medicine in baltimore md recently published their results in the journal science worldwide cancer remains one of the leading causes of death it is estimated that by 2030 the number of cancer deaths will have risen from 8 million to 13 million early diagnosis is key to reducing cancerrelated deaths the earlier the disease is diagnosed the higher the chances of treatment success but sadly many cancers are not caught until the later stages and this is largely due to a lack of fast and effective diagnostic tools however the johns hopkins researchers believe that cancerseek could bring us closer to a quick simple way to detect cancer in its early stages test produced high sensitivity and specificity when cancerous tumors form they release small fragments of mutated dna and proteins into the bloodstream and these can act as markers for cancer the new blood test works by identifying the markers for 16 gene mutations and eight proteins that are associated with eight different cancer types these include breast lung and colorectal cancer as well as five cancers ovarian liver stomach pancreatic and esophageal for which there are currently no routine screening tests for people at average risk '' a novelty of our classification method is that it combines the probability of observing various dna mutations together with the levels of several proteins in order to make the final call '' explains study coauthor cristian tomasetti phd an associate professor of oncology and biostatistics at johns hopkins university how gum disease could lead to cancer researchers shed light on how gum disease can fuel cancer read now for their study the researchers tested cancerseek on 1005 individuals who had been diagnosed with nonmetastatic forms of one of the eight cancers they found that the test was able to identify 70 percent of the cancers with sensitivity ranging from 33 percent for breast cancer to 98 percent for ovarian cancer sensitivity ranged from 69 percent to 98 percent for the five cancers that currently have no routine screening tests the researchers report in terms of specificity the test yielded an overall result of more than 99 percent on testing cancerseek on 812 healthy adults it only produced seven falsepositive results as study coauthor kenneth kinzler phd codirector of the ludwig center for cancer genetics and therapeutics at johns hopkins notes `` very high specificity was essential because falsepositive results can subject patients to unnecessary invasive followup tests and procedures to confirm the presence of cancer '' what is more the researchers found that their test was able to pinpoint the location of tumors for 83 percent of patients test could substantially impact patients the researchers note that larger studies will now be needed to further determine the efficacy of cancerseek as a routine screening test for cancer and such studies are in the pipeline however the team believes that the results of its current research are encouraging '' this has the potential to substantially impact patients earlier detection provides many ways to improve outcomes for patients '' says study coauthor dr anne marie lennon phd who is an associate professor of medicine surgery and radiology at johns hopkins '' optimally cancers would be detected early enough that they could be cured by surgery alone but even cancers that are not curable by surgery alone will respond better to systemic therapies when there is less advanced disease '' she adds the team hopes that cancerseek will one day offer a simple noninvasive and fast strategy for diagnosing cancer in its early stages '' this test represents the next step in changing the focus of cancer research from late stage disease to early disease which i believe will be critical to reducing cancer deaths in the longterm '' study coauthor dr bert vogelstein johns hopkins university school of medicinethey are usually marketed as a safe alternative to conventional cigarettes but a new study suggests that ecigarettes may still pose serious harm to health researchers suggest that ecigarettes may increase the risk of cancer and heart disease researchers at the new york university school of medicine in new york city found that mice exposed to electronic cigaratte ecigarette vapor experienced dna damage in the lungs bladder and heart which could increase the risk of cancer and heart disease such damage was also found in cultured human lung and bladder cells that had been exposed to ecigarette vapor for the equivalent of 10 years study coauthor moonshong tang of the department of environmental medicine at the new york university school of medicine and his colleagues recently reported their findings in the proceedings of the national academy of sciences ecigarettes also known as ecigs have soared in popularity in recent years particularly among teenagers and young adults according to the centers for disease control and prevention cdc more than 2 million middle and high school students in the united states report having used ecigarettes in the past 30 days ecigarettes are not approved by the food and drug administration fda as a quitsmoking aid after the us preventive services task force concluded that there is `` insufficient evidence to recommend for or against their use for smoking cessation '' however research has found that more than 80 percent of smokers believe that ecigarettes could help them to quit while more than 97 percent believe that the batterypowered devices can help to reduce the use of conventional tobacco the debate over ecigarette safety when it comes to our health the cdc believe that ecigarettes are not as harmful as conventional ones still because ecigarettes are relatively new to the market precisely how harmful they are remains unclear that said we are learning more and more about the potential dangers of ecigarette use or `` vaping '' the pros and cons of ecigarettes revealed a new report details the potential benefits and risks of ecigarette use read now in 2017 medical news today reported on a study that linked the flavorings in ecigarette liquid to impaired heart muscle function a more recent report claims that there is `` substantial evidence '' that ecigarette use increases heart rate and that some chemicals in the vapor can harm dna the study by tang and team provides further evidence of the harms of ecigarettes after finding that exposure to ecigarette vapor can damage dna in a way that could cause cancer and heart disease ecigarette vapor caused dna damage the researchers came to their findings by exposing 10 male mice to ecigarette vapor containing 10 milligrams of nicotine which is comparable with what humans inhale for 3 hours per day 5 days per week for 12 weeks when compared with a control group of mice that inhaled filtered air they found that the mice exposed to ecigarette vapor showed dna damage in their heart lungs and bladder what is more the scientists found that exposure to ecigarette vapor halted dna repair processes in the lung tissue of mice they found the same outcomes when testing longterm exposure to ecigarette vapor on human lung and bladder cells in conclusion to their findings tang and colleagues write '' based on these results we propose that ecs ecigarette smoke is carcinogenic and that ecig smokers have a higher risk than nonsmokers to develop lung and bladder cancer and heart diseases '' critics of the research however claim that this study does not prove that ecigarettes are harmful to health talking to the guardian peter hajek the director of the tobacco dependence research unit at queen mary university of london in the united kingdom says that the `` study shows nothing at all about the dangers of vaping '' he continues saying `` it doesnt show that vaping causes cancer this is one in a long line of false alarms which may be putting people off the switch from smoking to vaping which would undoubtedly be of great benefit to them '' it seems that the jury is out on whether or not vaping can cause cancer and heart disease but one thing is clear more studies are needed to find outbreaking research concludes that the use of two existing drugs could successfully treat certain lung cancers the study delves deep into the molecular survival kit of lung tumors understanding how lung tumors survive and grow leads to an innovative new treatment lung cancer is now the leading cause of cancer death in the united states responsible for almost 160000 deaths each year many are driven by the kras oncogene kras is an essential gene but in its mutant form it is an important step in the generation of many types of cancer for over 30 years the kras oncogene has been a focus of research finding a way to remove its teeth would be pivotal in the treatment of a range of cancers as part of this effort rather than targeting the gene directly some scientists have focused on pathways that are related to the errant gene one pathway of interest centers on insulin and insulinlike growth factor1 igf1 this pathway helps to regulate the uptake of nutrients into the cell providing it with the energy and raw ingredients it needs to grow if the tumor cells fuel supply could be severed its onward march might be halted however it is not clear whether kras oncogenes are reliant on this particular pathway and in clinical trials results have not been encouraging in fact one study in mice found that lung tumors actually became more aggressive after the pathway was suppressed attacking krasrelated pathways undeterred a team from the boston childrens hospital in massachusetts used a fresh approach in the mouse study mentioned above the insulinigf1 signaling pathway was only partially closed off in the latest study though a genetic technique was used that shut it down entirely to do this the scientists crossed two strains of genetically modified mice the first is a wellused model for krasdriven lung cancer and the other is a mouse used to study diabetes that lacks insulinigf1 signaling in the diabetes mouse model the insulinigf1 pathway is unshackled by the deletion of two genes irs1 and irs2 these encode `` adaptor '' proteins which are essential for the smooth running of the insulinigf1 pathway '' our study uses a robust way to block insulinigf1 signaling and addresses a longstanding question in krasmutant lung cancer when you use genetics results can be more conclusive '' senior study author nada kalaany phd an assistant professor at harvard medical school boston ma using their new model the scientists demonstrated that by suppressing the two adaptor proteins insulinigf1 signaling is blocked and lung tumors are significantly suppressed '' almost all animals in this lung cancer model typically die within 15 weeks of kras activation '' says kalaany `` but the ones that lost both irs1 and irs2 were completely fine we saw almost no tumors at 10 to 15 weeks '' this finding is important because drugs that block insulinigf1 signaling are already in use and freely available the results are published this week in the proceedings of the national academy of sciences while the preliminary findings are hopeful the researchers knew that there was more work to be done cancer is a complex evermorphing disease with a terrifying knack for circumventing medical interventions outfoxing lung cancer to observe whether the cancer cells were able to navigate around this new roadblock the team let the animals live longer to see what happened next as kalaany explains `` sure enough at around 16 weeks we started seeing some tumors so then we asked how were these tumor cells able to overcome loss of irs1 and irs2 '' how lung cancer cells disguise themselves to evade chemo by adopting the traits of cells from other major organs lung cancer cells can escape chemotherapy read now the answer was found in the levels of essential cellular building blocks amino acids tumor cells lacking the adaptor proteins failed to move amino acids into their cells despite a plentiful supply outside of the cell '' growth factors like igf1 tell cells that nutrients are around '' says kalaany `` so when you suppress their signaling the tumor cells dont take up the amino acids and think they are starved '' '' but we found that the tumor cells can compensate for this and break down their own proteins to generate amino acids '' so the krasdriven tumors threw out a curve ball they had once again figured out a workaround by breaking themselves down in a process known as autophagy they can generate the raw material they need to thrive the researchers however were one step ahead heading cancer off at the pass drugs that inhibit protein breakdown are already available these include chloroquine which is currently involved in a number of cancer drug trials and bortezomib which blocks proteasomes proteindigesting structures and is already used to treat myeloma when the two prongs of the attack were combined the results were more than encouraging they found that tumor cells lacking irs1 and irs2 did not grow well and when the inhibitors were added growth stopped almost completely additional studies will now be needed to understand how these two drug types might interact in a patient however this is a considerable breakthrough and the researchers are excited to take it to the next phase '' our work tries to identify metabolic dependencies and vulnerabilities in tumors '' says kalaany `` if we identify collaborators we would love to have a clinical trial in nonsmallcell lung cancer combining igf1 inhibitors with autophagy inhibitors or proteasome inhibitors '' by testing to breaking point every part of a tumor cells survival kit researchers will one day beat cancerhigh blood pressure or hypertension is a major risk factor for heart disease the leading cause of death in the united states but a new study has found that two classes of medication that are commonly used to lower blood pressure could present a death risk all on their own researchers have identified two blood pressure drugs that could raise mortality risk scientists at the intermountain medical center heart institute in salt lake city ut found that individuals with hypertension who used alpha blockers and alpha2 agonists to control their blood pressure showed an increase in blood pressure variability which could increase mortality risk lead study author dr brian clements and team have recently presented their findings at the 2018 american college of cardiology acc scientific sessions held in orlando fl blood pressure is the force of blood that pushes against the wall of the arteries and in november last year the american heart association aha and the acc set new guidelines now a person is considered to have hypertension if their systolic blood pressure the top number is 130 millimeters of mercury mmhg or higher and their diastolic blood pressure the bottom number is 80 mmhg or higher systolic blood pressure is the force of blood against the artery walls when the heart is beating while diastolic blood pressure is the force of blood when the heart is at rest or between heartbeats the updated guidelines mean that almost half of adults in the united states have high blood pressure which puts them at greater risk of heart attack stroke and heart disease among other health problems of course when it comes to treating hypertension the goal is to lower blood pressure this may be achieved through lifestyle changes such as adopting a healthful diet and increasing physical activity medication or both previous research however has discovered that consistency is key for blood pressure levels a study published in the bmj in 2016 for example associated higher variability of systolic blood pressure with a 15 percent increase in allcause mortality according to the new study from dr clements and colleagues certain types of medication that are used to lower blood pressure may be contributing to this mortality risk two medications should be avoided for their study the researchers analyzed the data of over 10500 adults with high blood pressure the participants had their blood pressure measured at least seven times between january 2007 and december 2011 and the type of blood pressure medication they were using was monitored common blood pressure drug raises skin cancer risk researchers reveal how a blood pressure medication may increase the risk of skin cancer read now the team used these data to assess whether certain classes of blood pressure medication were associated with variability in blood pressure levels the study revealed two classes of blood pressure medication that were linked to higher blood pressure variability in subjects alpha blockers and alpha2 agonists alpha blockers which include doxazosin mesylate and prazosin hydrochloride work by dilating the blood vessels alpha2 agonists such as methyldopa work by targeting sympathetic nervous system activity thereby reducing blood vessel constriction based on the study results dr clements and colleagues say that these two medications should not be used to treat hypertension '' patients should know what their blood pressure is '' he says `` and if its up and down all the time the patient should work with their physician to explore options for the best blood pressure medications that will reduce variances '' '' where possible the two types of medications that show an increase in variances should be avoided '' dr brian clements dr clements adds that ace inhibitors angiotensin receptor blockers calcium channel blockers and thiazide diuretics may be safer treatment options for people with hypertension `` people who are on other types of blood pressure medications have an increased risk of death '' he adds however blood pressure variability is not solely down to medication dr clements notes that the way in which blood pressure is measured can have a significant effect on readings '' because of the variables that affect blood pressure measurements '' says dr clements `` finding ways to more accurately measure blood pressure can better identify effective treatments for patients who have hypertension '' for accurate blood pressure readings he recommends sitting or laying down for 15 minutes before measurements are taken avoiding stressful situations and using a wellfitting blood pressure cuff may also helpa new study reveals that individuals with higher levels of belly fat and larger waistlines are more likely to have lower vitamin d levels where fat is stored on the body may impact vitamin d levels currently in medical circles vitamin d is the talk of the town produced in our skin on contact with sunlight it plays a myriad of roles in the human body in the past few months medical news today have covered a wealth of research into the group of fatsoluble secosteroids more commonly known as vitamin d for instance recent studies have found that vitamin d might protect against heart failure diabetes and cancer and that vitamin d deficiency causes hair loss vitamin d deficiency has traditionally been linked to bone health but it may also have a role to play in respiratory tract infections and autoimmune disease among others with more than 40 percent of the population of the united states being vitamin d deficient this is a serious issue some authors have referred to it as `` an ignored epidemic '' estimating that over 1 billion people worldwide have inadequate levels vitamin d and belly fat exposed they discovered that in women both total and abdominal fat were associated with lower vitamin d levels but that abdominal fat had the greatest impact in men however lower vitamin d levels were significantly linked with fat in the liver and abdomen across both sexes more belly fat predicted lower levels of vitamin d rafiq explains `` the strong relationship between increasing amounts of abdominal fat and lower levels of vitamin d suggests that individuals with larger waistlines are at a greater risk of developing deficiency and should consider having their vitamin d levels checked '' her next step is to understand why this relationship exists does a deficiency in vitamin d cause fat to be stored in the abdominal region or does belly fat decrease levels of vitamin d it will take more work to tease apart cause and effect as rafiq explains `` due to the observational nature of this study we can not draw a conclusion on the direction or cause of the association between obesity and vitamin d levels '' '' however this strong association may point to a possible role for vitamin d in abdominal fat storage and function '' rachida rafiq the links between obesity and vitamin d deficiency are growing increasingly robust the next challenge is working out a way to effectively tackle this issuebaking soda has been used as a home remedy for generations due to its antacid properties yet its benefits run even deeper and new research may explain why it is an effective aid in the treatment of autoimmune diseases such as arthritis how can this kitchen staple change the bodys inflammatory response baking soda also called sodium bicarbonate is a kitchen staple commonly used as a raising agent for cakes that being said it has also made a name for itself as a home remedy for various conditions half a teaspoon of baking soda is often taken to ease heartburn or acid reflux for example and this substance is also used to whiten teeth in a new study whose findings are now published in the journal of immunology researchers from the medical college of georgia at augusta university reveal exactly how drinking a solution of baking soda could prime the immune system against inflammatory diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis paul oconnor a renal physiologist at augusta university and colleagues tested the effects that drinking a baking soda solution would have first on rats and then on humans their experiments tell a complex story about how this salt provides a signal to a special kind of cell called `` mesothelial cells '' telling them that the body is fine and not under attack rendering an aggressive immune system unnecessary thus harmful autoimmune responses are averted baking soda and mesothelial cells mesothelial cells line the internal organs as well as many different cavities in the body not only do they prevent organs and other internal tissue from sticking together they also serve other functions not all of which have been studied in detail in the new study oconnor and team tested the effect that a baking soda solution would have first on rats and then on healthy human participants and they noted that it influenced an intriguing mechanism can this biochemical switch off inflammation researchers may have found a way to `` switch off '' certain immune cells when necessary read now baking soda `` prompts '' the stomach to produce more gastric acid which allows it to digest food quicker and easier but in addition to this it also seems to tell the mesothelial cells that line the spleen to `` take it easy '' because there is no threat basically in oconnor words mesothelial cells learn that `` its most likely a hamburger not a bacterial infection '' so they in turn do not activate the spleens `` army '' of macrophages or white blood cells tasked with clearing up potentially harmful cellular detritus '' certainly drinking bicarbonate affects the spleen and we think its through the mesothelial cells '' oconnor explains mesothelial cells communicate with the organs they line using small projections called microvilli and the medium through which they send their message is the neurotransmitter acetylcholine from inflammatory to antiinflammatory so what actually happens the study authors note that those who drank the baking soda solution experienced a shift in the kinds of immune cells activated in the spleen in fact proinflammatory macrophages m1 dwindled in number while the levels of antiinflammatory cells m2 rose the same kinds of cells are also housed in the blood and kidneys and baking soda happens to be used in the treatment of chronic kidney disease this idea prompted the new studys authors to explore the mechanisms through which this substance might help to improve renal function '' we started thinking how does baking soda slow progression of kidney disease '' says oconnor at first the researchers analyzed the effects of the baking soda solution on a rat model of kidney disease and then again on healthy rats which acted as the control sample this is when the researchers noticed that the levels of m1 cells in the kidneys dropped while those of m2 cells increased both the rats with kidney disease and the healthy rats presented the same development and it was this shift that flagged up the notion that baking soda could influence the inflammatory response at cellular level when the researchers recruited healthy medical students and asked them to drink the baking soda solution it became apparent the antiinflammatory effect of this substance happened in the spleen as well as in the blood '' the shift from inflammatory to an antiinflammatory profile is happening everywhere we saw it in the kidneys we saw it in the spleen now we see it in the peripheral blood '' paul oconnor safe way to treat inflammatory disease one of the authors main revelations was the fact that it was the mesothelial cells that mediated the antiinflammatory signals an existing working theory had been that signals were transmitted to the relevant cells through the vagus nerve a long cranial nerve that communicates with the heart lungs and various organs in the abdomen but experiments revealed that this idea was incorrect when the scientists tried cutting off this nerve this did not affect the behavior of the mesothelial cells instead it became apparent that these cells had a more direct communication with the organs they lined than previously thought oconnor and his team became aware of this when they noted that moving the spleen affected mesothelial cells that lined it and the signals modulating the inflammatory response were lost '' we think the cholinergic acetylcholine signals that we know mediate this antiinflammatory response arent coming directly from the vagal nerve innervating the spleen but from the mesothelial cells that form these connections to the spleen '' explains oconnor the results begin to provide an answer as to why baking soda can help with autoimmune diseases including arthritis and further research into these mechanisms could help to optimize the results obtained through this common compound '' its potentially a really safe way to treat inflammatory disease '' oconnor concludesanxiety disorders are common across the united states thought to affect around 40 million adults each year however as if these feelings of worry and fear arent enough to contend with a new study suggests that older people who have worsening anxiety symptoms may be more likely to develop alzheimers disease researchers have linked increasing anxiety symptoms in older age to higher levels of a protein linked to alzheimers researchers found that increasing symptoms of anxiety were linked to higher levels of betaamyloid which is a protein associated with alzheimers disease in the brains of older people with normal cognitive functioning first study author dr nancy donovan who is a geriatric psychiatrist at brigham and womens hospital in boston ma and team say that the results suggest that a rise in the sypmtoms of anxiety could be an early sign of alzheimers the findings were recently published in the american journal of psychiatry alzheimers disease is a form of dementia characterized by problems with memory and thinking as well as changes in behavior it is estimated that around 55 million people in the us are living with alzheimers of whom around 54 million are over the age of 65 the precise causes of alzheimers disease remain unclear but scientists believe that betaamyloid plays a key role this is a protein that can form `` plaques '' which have been found to block nerve cell communication in the brains of people with alzheimers these plaques are considered to be a hallmark of the disease and research has suggested that an increase in betaamyloid levels can occur up to 10 years before the onset of alzheimers symptoms according to the new study anxiety could play a significant role in increased betaamyloid levels among older adults targeting anxiety may slow alzheimers previous studies have suggested that depression and anxiety might be indicators of alzheimers since symptoms of these mental health conditions often occur in the early stages of the disease for their study dr donovan and colleagues sought to determine whether or not betaamyloid might play a role in this association alzheimers tripleaction diabetes drug shows promise as treatment researchers reveal how a diabetes drug could help to treat alzheimers read now the research included 270 adults between age 62 and 90 with normal cognitive functioning all of whom underwent positron emission tomography at study baseline and annually during 5 years of followup in order to determine levels of betaamyloid in their brains symptoms of anxiety and depression among the adults were assessed using the 30item geriatric depression scale it was found that adults who showed an increase in anxiety symptoms over 5 years of followup also had higher levels of betaamyloid in their brains the researchers say that this indicates that worsening anxiety might be an early sign of alzheimers disease '' if further research substantiates anxiety as an early indicator it would be important for not only identifying people early on with the disease but also treating it and potentially slowing or preventing the disease process early on '' dr nancy donovan the scientists point out that followup studies are required to determine whether older adults who experience an increase in anxiety symptoms actually go on to develop alzheimersnew results could change the face of alzheimers treatment the herpes simplex virus is found to play a vital role in the condition and antiherpetic medication is shown to have a dramatic effect on dementia risk alzheimers disease may soon be treated with antiviral medication last month medical news today reported on a study that found `` strong evidence '' that viruses are involved in alzheimers disease the postmortem analyses of brain tissue found that people who lived with this dementia type also had more herpesviruses 6 and 7 than people without alzheimers now a scientific commentary suggests that the study that mnt covered is not the only one to pinpoint a link between herpes and dementia in fact three more studies have strengthened this link and the commentary recently published in the journal of alzheimers disease – takes a look at all three ruth itzhaki who is a professor of neuroscience and experimental psychology at the university of manchester in the united kingdom alongside richard lathe who is a professor in the division of infection and pathway medicine at the university of edinburgh also in the uk authored the commentary remarkable magnitude of antiviral effect the studies referenced in the commentary are two articles tsai et al 2017 and chen et al 2018 that suggest that acute herpes zoster infection puts people at a higher risk of dementia and one article that shows that aggressive treatment with antiherpetic medication drastically lowers dementia risk the latter study deemed `` most important '' by profs itzhaki and lathe examined 8362 people aged 50 and above who received a diagnosis of herpes simplex virus hsv infection as well as a control group of 25086 agematched healthy people breakthrough researchers fix alzheimers gene by correcting the faulty apoe4 gene researchers were able to erase its damaging effects on the brain read now the two groups were followed for almost a decade between 2001 and 2010 in the herpes group the risk of dementia was over 25 times higher than in the control group significantly the study also revealed that aggressive antiviral treatment reduced the relative risk of dementia by 10 times prof lathe comments on these new findings saying `` not only is the magnitude of the antiviral effect remarkable but also the fact that despite the relatively brief duration and the timing of treatment in most patients severely affected by hsv1 it appeared to prevent the longterm damage in the brain that results in alzheimers '' '' this article and two others provide the first population evidence for a causal link between herpes virus infection and alzheimers disease a hugely important finding '' prof ruth itzhaki '' i believe we are the first to realize the implications of these striking data on this devastating condition which principally affects the elderly '' prof itzhaki adds '' but '' she says `` we believe that these safe and easily available antivirals may have a strong part to play in combating the disease in these patients '' she also suggests that in the future it may be possible to prevent the disease `` by vaccination against the virus in infancy '' '' successful treatment by a specific drug or successful vaccination against the putative microbe are the only ways to prove that a microbe is the cause of a noninfectious human disease '' says prof itzhakiwith marijuana legalization on the rise an increasing number of studies are exploring the drugs potential harms and benefits however a new study suggests that when it comes to brain health alcohol is more damaging researchers say that alcohol causes more damage to the brain than marijuana does scientists at the university of colorado boulder conducted a review of existing imaging data that looked at the effects of alcohol and marijuana or cannabis on the brain their findings linked alcohol consumption with longterm changes to the structure of white matter and gray matter in the brain the use of marijuana however seemed to have no significant longterm effects on brain structure study leader rachel thayer of the department of psychology and neuroscience at the university of colorado boulder and colleagues recently reported their results in the journal addiction it is estimated that around 222 million people in the united states have used marijuana in the past month making it `` the most commonly used illicit drug '' in the country across the us however it is increasingly becoming legalized for both medicinal and recreational purposes as a result of this changing legislation researchers have been trying to find out more about how marijuana may benefit health as well as the damage that it could cause last year for example medical news today reported on a study linking marijuana use to a greater risk of psychosis in teenagers while another study claimed that the drug is `` worse than cigarettes '' for cardiovascular health on the other side of the coin researchers have found that cannabinoids which are the active compounds in marijuana could help to prevent migraine and a more recent study linked marijuana use to an increased sex drive marijuana vs alcohol which is worse for this latest study thayer and colleagues sought to learn more about how marijuana use affects the brain study coauthor kent hutchison also of the department of psychology and neuroscience notes that to date studies that have investigated this association have produced mixed results '' when you look at these studies going back years '' he explains `` you see that one study will report that marijuana use is related to a reduction in the volume of the hippocampus the next study then comes around and they say that marijuana use is related to changes in the cerebellum `` teen marijuana use may lead to bipolar symptoms later on researchers have linked marijuana use in adolescence to a greater risk of bipolar symptoms read now '' the point is that theres no consistency across all of these studies in terms of the actual brain structures '' with the aim of closing the gap on this inconsistency the researchers conducted a new analysis on existing brain imaging data they looked at how marijuana use affects white matter and gray matter in the brain and how its effects compare with another `` drug '' that we have become so accustomed to alcohol gray matter is the tissue on the brains surface that primarily consists of nerve cell bodies white matter is the deeper brain tissue that contains myelinated nerve fibers which are branches protruding from nerve cells that transmit electrical impulses to other cells and tissues the team notes that any reduction in the size of white or gray matter or a loss in their integrity can lead to impairments in brain functioning '' with alcohol weve known its bad for the brain for decades '' notes hutchison `` but for cannabis we know so little '' marijuana use had no impact the study included the brain images of 853 adults who were aged between 18 and 55 years and 439 teenagers between the ages of 14 and 18 all participants varied in their use of alcohol and marijuana the researchers found that alcohol use particularly in adults who had been drinking for many years was associated with a reduction in gray matter volume as well as a reduction in the integrity of white matter marijuana use however appeared to have no impact on the structure of gray or white matter in either teenagers or adults based on these findings the researchers believe that drinking alcohol is likely to be much more harmful to brain health than using marijuana '' while marijuana may also have some negative consequences it definitely is nowhere near the negative consequences of alcohol '' kent hutchison when it comes to the possible benefits of marijuana use however thayer and her team note that the jury is still out and further research is needed to reach some conclusionsa form of intermittent fasting known as the 168 diet helps obese individuals to lose weight and lower their blood pressure according to a new study timerestricted eating may be the key to weight loss more and more people now turn to intermittent fasting as a fast and effective way to lose weight there are different form of this diet depending on the time intervals of `` fasting '' and `` feasting '' the socalled 52 diet for instance consists of eating normally for 5 days every week and fasting for 2 days in the fasting days the dieter restricts their calorie intake to 500 or 600 per day in daily fasting or the 168 diet people eat whatever they like for 8 hours and fast for the remaining 16 a new study evaluates the benefits of this 168 pattern for obese individuals and finds that not only does the diet work but also that it helps to lower blood pressure as many as 933 million adults have obesity in the united states according to the latest data from the centers for disease control and prevention cdc thats almost 40 percent of the countrys entire population this research was led by corresponding author krista varady an associate professor of kinesiology and nutrition at the university of illinois at chicago and the findings were published in the journal nutrition and healthy aging losing weight without counting calories varady and colleagues recruited 23 obese study participants who were aged 45 years on average with an average body mass index bmi of 35 between 10 am and 6 pm the participants could eat whatever and however much they liked but they were only allowed to drink water and caloriefree drinks for the remaining 16 hours intermittent fasting may have profound health benefits some researchers say that this type of diet can also slow down aging and stave off disease read now all the study participants were followed for a period of 12 weeks and their dieting outcomes were compared with those of a previous weight loss trial of another type of intermittent fasting called `` alternate day fasting '' in alternate day fasting they can eat whatever they like for one day and fast for the following day on average when compared with the control trial those on the 168 diet consumed 350 fewer calories lost 3 percent of their weight and had lower blood pressure more specifically the systolic blood pressure of those who fasted daily dropped by an average of 7 millimeters of mercury however insulin resistance cholesterol and fat mass remained the same between the two compared groups as varady and her colleagues conclude `` these preliminary data offer promise for the use of timerestricted feeding as a weight loss technique in obese adults but longerterm largescale randomized controlled trials are required '' the studys corresponding author also comments on the significance of the findings saying `` the results we saw in this study are similar to the results weve seen in other studies on alternate day fasting '' '' but '' she adds `` one of the benefits of the 168 diet may be that it is easier for people to maintain we observed that fewer participants dropped out of this study when compared to studies on other fasting diets '' '' the takehome message from this study is that there are options for weight loss that do not include calorie counting or eliminating certain foods '' krista varady '' the 168 diet is another tool for weight loss that we now have preliminary scientific evidence to support '' varady concludes `` when it comes to weight loss people need to find what works for them because even small amounts of success can lead to improvements in metabolic health ''fish oil is hailed for its plentiful health benefits but new research suggests that the longterm consumption of fish oil or sunflower oil may increase the risk of fatty liver disease later in life researchers say that lifelong intake of fish oil or sunflower oil could raise the risk of fatty liver disease in later life by studying rats researchers found that lifelong intake of sunflower oil or fish oil led to changes in the liver that make the organ vulnerable to nonalcoholic steatohepatitis nash nash is a more serious form of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease nafld study coauthor josé luis quiles a professor of physiology working at the university of granada in spain and colleagues recently reported their findings in the journal of nutritional biochemistry it is estimated that around 20 percent of people in the united states who have nafld also have nash and the condition becomes more common with age nash is characterized by a buildup of fat in the liver which is not caused by alcohol consumption inflammation and liver cell damage the liver damage that occurs in nash can increase the risk of liver cirrhosis and liver cancer some of the key risk factors for nash include overweight and obesity high blood pressure high cholesterol and type 2 diabetes which are factors heavily influenced by diet studying how dietary fats affect the liver building on the link between diet and nash the new study from prof quiles and his colleagues suggests that the type of oils we consume could play a role in our laterlife risk of the condition the researchers came to their findings by analyzing the effects of different dietary fats including sunflower oil fish oil and virgin olive oil on rat livers in detail the team looked at how lifelong intake of each of these oils impacted the structure of the rodents livers as well as their effects on gene expression liver fibrosis or scarring oxidative stress and the length of telomeres kiwi compound may prevent nonalcoholic fatty liver disease research suggests that nafld could be prevented with a compound found in kiwi read now oxidative stress is defined as an imbalance between free radicals which are molecules that can damage cells and the bodys ability to `` deoxidize '' these molecules and prevent their harmful effects telomeres are `` caps '' at the end of each strand of dna and they protect our chromosomes the shorter our telomeres the greater the damage to our cells research has shown that a reduction in telomere length plays a key role in cellular aging and agerelated disease telomeres that are too long however can increase the risk of cancer additionally the team looked at how the liver evolves with age as a result of the different dietary fats consumed olive oil best for a healthy liver the researchers not only found that liver fat accumulates with age but they also revealed that the type of fat that builds up on the liver is influenced by the type of fats that we eat as prof quiles points out `` this means that regardless of this accumulation some livers age in a healthier way than others and with a greater or lesser predisposition to certain diseases '' the study revealed that fish oil and sunflower oil negatively impacted the liver health of the rats lifelong sunflower oil intake was found to trigger liver fibrosis and it also altered the structure of the organ led to changes in gene expression and increased oxidation in liver cells rats that had a lifelong intake of fish oil demonstrated an increase in agerelated cell oxidation in their livers the team reports and they also experienced a decrease in electron transport chain activity in the mitochondria the `` powerhouses '' of the cell which impairs cell function fish oil also led to an increase in relative telomere length in the liver the researchers report olive oil however was found to cause the least damage to the liver taken together the team says these findings indicate that virgin olive oil might be the best dietary fat for laterlife liver health '' the alterations caused by the longterm consumption of sunflower and fish oils make the liver susceptible to nonalcoholic steatohepatitis a very serious disease that may act as a catalyst for other liver diseases such as cirrhosis and liver cancer we believe that this study will be very useful in preventing and treating diverse liver diseases '' prof josé luis quiles '' virgin olive oil is the healthiest option '' he adds `` which has already been proven in relation to diverse aspects of health '' these findings may come as a surprise fish oil is the most commonly used natural product in the us due to its frequently documented health benefits still this latest study certainly provides some food for thought when it comes to choosing which fats to include in the dietpopular belief has it and even some governmental authorities on nutrition agree that we should avoid fullfat dairy products due to their high content of saturated fats but a new study boldly challenges these claims fullfat dairy products may actually be good for cardiovascular health wholefat dairy does not raise cardiovascular risk conversely some fats present in certain dairy products might even keep stroke and heart disease at bay this is the main takeaway of a recent study led by dr dariush mozaffarian from the friedman school of nutrition science and policy at tufts university in boston ma with their findings dr mozaffarian and team challenge not only popular opinions but also the stance of governmental organizations such as the united states department of agriculture usda and the us department of health human services the two bodies advise people to avoid fullfat dairy due to its impact on cholesterol levels the saturated fats found in wholefat dairy products warn the usda raise levels of lowdensity lipoprotein ldl cholesterol also known as the `` bad '' kind of cholesterol in time high ldl cholesterol may lead to cardiovascular conditions such as atherosclerosis or coronary artery disease however the new study turns the idea that fullfat dairy is bad for you on its head the surprising findings were published in the american journal of clinical nutrition marcia otto who is an assistant professor in the department of epidemiology human genetics and environmental sciences at the university of texas health science center at houston is the first and corresponding author of the paper dairy fat may prevent heart disease stroke to study the effect of dairy on mortality risk and cardiovascular health dr mozaffarian and team examined over 2900 us seniors aged 65 and above the researchers measured the participants blood plasma levels of three fatty acids contained by dairy products at the beginning of the study in 1992 6 years later and then 13 years later associations with `` total mortality causespecific mortality and cardiovascular disease cvd risk '' were examined these four foods are proven to lower your cholesterol the `` portfolio diet '' has been proved to keep the heart healthy by several studies read now during the 22year followup period 2428 of the participants died of these deaths 833 were due to heart disease however none of the three fatty acids examined correlated with the risk of total mortality in fact high circulating levels of heptadecanoic fatty acid were associated with a lower risk of death from heart disease also adults with higher levels of fatty acids overall were 42 percent less likely to die from stroke revealed the analysis dietary guidelines should be revised according to the studys corresponding author the findings suggest that current dietary guidelines need to be amended the 2015–2020 dietary guidelines for americans issued by the office of disease prevention and health promotion recommend the consumption of `` fatfree and lowfat 1 percent dairy including milk yogurt cheese or fortified soy beverages commonly known as soymilk '' however otto disagrees `` consistent with previous findings '' she says `` our results highlight the need to revisit current dietary guidance on whole fat dairy foods which are rich sources of nutrients such as calcium and potassium '' '' these are essential for health not only during childhood but throughout life particularly also in later years when undernourishment and conditions like osteoporosis are more common '' adds the researcher '' dairy fat contrary to popular belief does not increase the risk of heart disease or overall mortality in older adults in addition the results suggest that one fatty acid present in dairy may lower risk of death from cardiovascular disease particularly from stroke '' marcia otto she adds `` consumers have been exposed to so much different and conflicting information about diet particularly in relation to fats '' and she highlights the fact that `` a growing body of evidence '' suggests that dairy fat is actually good for you '' its important to have robust studies so people can make more balanced and informed choices based on scientific fact rather than hearsay '' otto concludesa new study looking at blood stem cells uncovered fresh details surrounding the mechanisms by which alcohol raises the risk of developing cancer a new study unearths the details of cancers relationship with alcohol alcohol is known to raise the risk of no fewer than seven types of cancer these are mouth upper throat pharynx voice box laryngeal esophageal breast liver and bowel cancer though the links are established exactly how alcohol works to induce malignancy is not as wellunderstood several mechanisms are thought to be at work most previous studies have only examined cells in the laboratory looking at changes in them after exposure to alcohol ethanol recently researchers from mrc laboratory of molecular biology in cambridge united kingdom set out to gain a clearer picture of the alcoholcancer relationship using whole animals their study which was funded by cancer research uk is published this week in the journal nature acetaldehyde and blood stem cells the team fed diluted ethanol to mice and then used chromosome analysis and dna sequencing to measure any damage caused by acetaldehyde a chemical produced when alcohol is processed they focused their attention on a specific cell type blood stem cells blood stem cells found in blood and bone marrow are immature blood cells that can develop into any type of blood cell including white blood cells platelets and red blood cells it is important to understand how alcohol damages these cells as faulty stem cells are known to cause cancer as alcohol is broken down in the gut bacteria convert it into large quantities of acetaldehyde a chemical that has previously been shown to cause cancer in animals even light drinkers at risk of cancer a recent statement from the american society of clinical oncology outlines the dangers of alcohol read now following the analysis the researchers found that acetaldehyde could in fact damage and break dna within blood stem cells chromosomes became rearranged and the dna sequence was permanently changed in stem cells lead study author prof ketan patel says `` some cancers develop due to dna damage in stem cells while some damage occurs by chance our findings suggest that drinking alcohol can increase the risk of this damage '' selfdefense mechanisms alongside new insights into the damage that ethanol causes to stem cells the scientists uncovered new information about the protective mechanisms employed by our bodies in response to alcohol enzymes called aldehyde dehydrogenases aldhs form the first line of defense against alcoholrelated damage aldhs break alcohol down into acetate `` which our cells can use as a source of energy '' millions of people many east asians for instance have low levels of aldh or faulty copies of the enzymes this means that toxic acetaldehyde builds up in the body these individuals will experience telltale flushed cheeks and potentially feel ill when the researchers investigated mice without aldh they found that alcohol caused four times as much damage to dna when compared with mice that could produce aldh beyond aldh the body has a range of other secondary mechanisms that can repair various types of dna damage but these mechanisms do not always work some people have mutations that render them ineffective '' our study highlights that not being able to process alcohol effectively can lead to an even higher risk of alcoholrelated dna damage and therefore certain cancers '' prof ketan patel '' but '' he continues `` its important to remember that alcohol clearance and dna repair systems are not perfect and alcohol can still cause cancer in different ways even in people whose defense mechanisms are intact '' alcohol is known to give rise to cancer and studies such as this help us to understand why and will eventually help to prevent or slow alcoholrelated cancers as prof linda bauld from cancer research uk says `` this thoughtprovoking research highlights the damage alcohol can do to our cells costing some people more than just a hangover ''there are a million things that we do every day without thinking brushing our teeth drying our hair after a shower and unlocking our phone screen so we can check our messages are all part of our routine but what takes place in the brain as we learn a new habit what happens in the brain when habits take shape whats something youve learned to do without thinking it might be locking the door behind you as you leave which could lead to some panic later as you wonder if you actually remembered to do it it might be driving to work have you ever had that uncanny experience of finding yourself at your destination without fully remembering how you got there i certainly have and its all thanks to the brains trusty autopilot mode habits drive our lives so much so that sometimes we might want to break the habit as the saying goes and experience something new but habits are a useful tool when we do something enough times we become effortlessly good at it which is perhaps why aristotle reportedly believed that `` excellence is not an act but a habit '' so what does habit formation look like in the brain how do our neural networks behave as we learn something and consolidate it into an effortless behavior through repetition these are the questions that ann graybiel and her colleagues from the massachusetts institute of technology in chestnut hill set out to answer in a recent study the findings of which are published in the journal current biology bookending neural signals although a habitual action seems so simple and effortless it actually typically involves a string of small necessary movements such as unlocking the car getting into it adjusting the mirrors securing the seatbelt and so on this complex set of movements that amount to one routine action that we perform unconsciously is called `` chunking '' and although we know that it exists exactly how `` chunks '' form and stabilize has remained mysterious so far could this protein hold the key to memory to store or not to store learn about the protein that may hold the key to memory retention read now the new study now suggests that some brain cells are tasked with `` bookending '' the chunks that correspond to habitual actions in another study graybiel and her former team found that the striatum a region of the brain previously associated with decisionmaking also plays an important role in acquiring habits working with mice the team noted that the patterns of signals transmitted between neurons in the striatum shifted as the animals were taught a new sequence of actions turning in one direction at a sound signal while navigating a maze which then evolved into a habit at the beginning of the learning process the neurons in the mices striata emitted a continuous string of signals the scientists saw but as the mices actions started to consolidate into habitual movements the neurons fired their distinctive signals only at the beginning and at the end of the task performed when a signaling pattern takes root explain graybiel and colleagues a habit has taken shape and breaking it becomes a difficult endeavor brain patterns that indicate habits although edifying graybiels previous efforts did not establish for certain that the signaling patterns observed in the brain were related to habit formation they could simply have been motor commands that regulated the mices running behavior in order to confirm the idea that the patterns corresponded to the chunking associated with habit formation graybiel and her current team devised a different set of experiments in the new study they set out to teach rats to press two levers repeatedly in a specific order the researchers used reward conditioning to motivate the animals if they pressed the levers in the correct sequence they were offered chocolate milk to ensure that there would be no doubt regarding the solidity of the experiments results and that they would be able to identify brain activity patterns related to habit formation rather than anything else the scientists taught the rats different sequences sure enough once the animals had learned to press the levers in the sequence established by their trainers the team noticed the same `` bookending '' pattern in the striatum sets of neurons would fire signals at the beginning and end of a task thus delimitating a `` chunk '' `` i think '' explains graybiel `` this more or less proves that the development of bracketing patterns serves to package up a behavior that the brain and the animals consider valuable and worth keeping in their repertoire '' '' it really is a highlevel signal that helps to release that habit and we think the end signal says the routine has been done '' ann graybiel finally the team also noted the formation of another complementary pattern of activity in a group of inhibitory brain cells called `` interneurons '' in the striatum '' the interneurons '' explains lead study author nuné martiros of harvard university in cambridge ma `` were activated during the time when the rats were in the middle of performing the learned sequence '' she adds that the interneurons `` could possibly be preventing the principal neurons from initiating another routine until the current one was finished '' '' the discovery of this opposite activity by the interneurons '' martiros concludes `` also gets us one step closer to understanding how brain circuits can actually produce this pattern of activity ''eat well for a long and healthy life – thats a mantra that were all familiar with but what are the best foods to help us achieve that goal in this article we give you an overview of some of the most healthful and nutritious foods what are the best foods for a healthful diet we investigate official figures indicate that currently the top three countries in the world with the highest life expectancy are the principality of monaco japan and singapore these are places where the inhabitants experience a high quality of life and an important element of that is eating healthful meals often we find praise for `` superfoods '' in the media – foods so high in nutritional value that they are seen as dietary superheroes nutritionists reject the term `` superfoods '' as a buzzword that can influence people to place too high an expectation on a limited range of foods when in reality a balanced diet and healthful lifestyle require more effort than eating your fiveaday still there are certain foods that are more nutritious than others and many that as research has shown have a protective effect against a range of diseases here we give you an overview of some of the best foods that you may want to consider including in your diet in your quest for a happy healthy life edamame soybeans edamame or fresh soybeans have been a staple of asian cuisine for generations but they have also been gaining popularity on the western front of late soybeans are often sold in snack packs but they are also added to a varied range of dishes from soups to ricebased meals though they are served as cooked and seasoned on their own too edamame and tofu are rich in isoflavones which may have anticancer properties the beans are rich in isoflavones a type of phytoestrogen – that is plantderived estrogenlike substances isoflavones are known to have antiinflammatory antioxidant anticancer and antimicrobial properties thus they can help to regulate the inflammatory response of the body slow down cellular aging fight microbes as well as reportedly protect against certain types of cancer edamame are rich in two types of isoflavones in particular genistein and daidzein a study covered last year on medical news today found that genistein could be used to improve breast cancer treatment in the meantime the study authors note that `` lifetime intake of soy has been linked to reduced risk of breast cancer '' so we may want to include soybeans in our normal diet tofu soybean curd similarly tofu a white cheeselike product made of soybean curds has been linked to a wealth of health benefits for the same reasons tofu is often found cooked in typical eastern asian dishes it can be fried baked or boiled for instance in soups as a soy product it is rich in isoflavones whose health benefits weve outlined above it is also a good source of protein and it contains all the essential amino acids that our bodies need to synthesize protein moreover it is also rich in minerals which our bodies need to keep our teeth and bones strong and healthy and to derive energy tofu is a source of calcium iron manganese selenium phosphorous magnesium zinc and copper some specialists also suggest that eating tofu can make you feel fuller for longer so incorporating it into your meals may help to prevent overeating carrots this common culinary ingredient best known in its orange variety is famously recommended for its high content of betacarotene a pigment and carotenoid that gives the widespread version of this root vegetable its color carrots can protect against agerelated eyesight damage betacarotene can be converted by our bodies into vitamin a which according to the national institutes of health nih `` is involved in immune function vision reproduction and cellular communication '' our bodies can not produce vitamin a on their own so it must be derived from our diet this pigment is also an antioxidant that can protect the cells in our bodies from the aging damage caused by free radicals moreover research has shown that foods rich in carotenoids and of course carrots are a prime example here can protect against agerelated macular degeneration the vision damage caused by old age some varieties of carrots such as white carrots do not contain the orange pigment betacarotene but they do all contain falcarinol a nutrient which some studies claim may have a protective effect against cancer while raw carrots may be best for health as they retain their nutrients there are also ways of cooking carrots that can keep most of their nutrients `` locked in '' in an interview one researcher who investigated the anticancer effect of falcarinol from carrots kirsten brandt from newcastle university in the united kingdom suggests that we may want to boil our carrots whole if we want them cooked but still bursting with nutrients '' chopping up your carrots increases the surface area so more of the nutrients leach out into the water while they are cooked by keeping them whole and chopping them up afterwards you are locking in nutrients and the taste so the carrot is better for you all round '' cruciferous vegetables another important type of food on our list are cruciferous vegetables also known as `` brassica vegetables '' which include a wide array of green foods such as cabbage broccoli brussels sprouts cauliflower bok choy radish and kale cruciferous vegetables can bring a wealth of health benefits these vegetables boast an especially rich nutrient content including many vitamins c e k and folate minerals potassium calcium and selenium and carotenoids lutein betacarotene and zeaxanthin cruciferous vegetables also contain glucosinolates the substances that give these greens their characteristic pungent flavor these substances have been found to bring diverse health benefits some glucosinolates seem to regulate the bodys stress and inflammation response they have antimicrobial properties and some of them are being investigated for their anticancer potential one recent study covered on mnt found that leafy greens including some cruciferous vegetables such as kale and collard greens helped to slow down cognitive decline consequently the study researchers suggest that `` adding a daily serving of green leafy vegetables to your diet may be a simple way to foster your brain health '' kale broccoli and cabbage have also been shown to have a protective effect on heart health thanks to their vitamin k content finally cruciferous vegetables are also a great source of soluble fiber which plays a role in regulating blood sugar levels and diminishing the absorption of fat thus helping to prevent excess weight gain salmon recent studies have suggested that consumption of meat mostly red meat but also some kinds of poultry meat could be harmful to our health in the long run a good alternative for protein in this case is fish and salmon in particular affords many nutritional benefits salmon could protect cognitive health researchers say salmon is packed with protein and also contains plenty of omega3 fatty acids which is said to be beneficial for eyesight research has demonstrated that omega3 protects against dryeye syndrome characterized by insufficient lubrication of the eyes which can lead to soreness and blurred vision moreover omega3 fatty acids have been associated with brain health and research suggests that they can stave off cognitive decline associated with aging salmon also has a high potassium content and according to a new study reported on mnt last autumn potassium can prevent the onset of heart disease additionally this type of fish is rich in the mineral selenium which contributes to the health of the thyroid gland the thyroid gland helps to regulate hormonal activity and is involved in metabolic processes what are the best diets for 2018 learn which diets researchers recommend for a healthy life read now although both farmed and wild salmon are available on the market wild salmon has been found to be more nutritious overall with a higher protein content and also to have less saturated fat which means that it is more healthful and better for weight management however farmed salmon is a more sustainable resource and specialists say that the differences between farmed and wild caught salmon may not be so stark as to motivate us to prefer one type over the other citrus fruits finally citrus fruits are the unsung heroes of a healthful diet these include a number of fruits that are now available worldwide such as oranges grapefruit lemons limes clementines mandarins and tangerines the flavonoids in citrus fruits have been cited in connection to longer lifespans for a long time citrus fruits have been recommended by nutritionists and grandmothers alike for their high content of vitamin c which has antioxidant properties and is said to bring a wide array of health benefits including to reduce inflammatory damage and to fend off infections specialists point out however that this type of fruits goes well beyond just vitamin c when it comes to nutritional content '' the fruits are abundant in other macronutrients including sugars dietary fiber potassium folate calcium thiamin niacin vitamin b6 phosphorus magnesium copper riboflavin and pantothenic acid '' if this list of dietary goodies hasnt colored you impressed the specialists then go on to explain how citrus fruits contain even more organic compounds such as flavonoids coumarins and carotenoids that have been said to have protective effects against cancer cardiovascular diseases and neurodegenerative diseases research has shown that flavonoids in which citrus fruits are particularly rich can `` prevent or delay chronic diseases caused by obesity '' flavonoids have also garnered a lot of scientific attention for their anticancer potential and consumption of especially flavonoidrich citrus fruits has been associated with a significantly prolonged lifespan the inhabitants of the japanese prefecture of okinawa known to be some of the longestliving populations of the world regularly eat shikuwasa also known as `` shequasar '' a citrus fruit typical of the region which contains more flavonoids than most other citrus fruits drinking shikuwasa juice rich in flavonoid content has also been linked to better liver health although all of the foods mentioned above are appreciated for their significant health benefits we should not forget that wellbeing and longevity can not be achieved without a balanced inclusive diet and a healthful lifestyle moreover current studies suggest that our genetic makeup may have an important say as to which foods work best for our health so keeping our list of nutritious foods in mind make sure you follow the healthful diet that is most effective for youwhen it comes to new years resolutions eating better is at the top of our list but which diet plan is the best a panel of health experts on behalf of us news world report reveal the toprated diets for 2018 us news world report reveal the best diets for 2018 it is estimated that around 45 million people in the united states go on a diet each year with weight loss being the primary goal however whether youre dieting to lose weight or simply to improve overall health sticking to a specific eating plan can be challenging with so many diets to choose from how can you tell which one will work for you us news world report put together a panel of health experts every year to evaluate the most popular diets in the us this year the experts assessed 40 diets ranking them from lowest to highest in seven categories including the best diets for weight loss diabetes and heart health so we take a look at some of the key results the best diets for weight loss for the majority of dieters weight loss is the ultimate goal but losing weight and keeping it off is far from easy research suggests that approximately 30–35 percent of weight lost from dieting is regained within 1 year but it is possible to maintain weight loss its just a matter of finding the right eating plan the us news world report panel of experts evaluated 40 popular diets for their effects on both short and longterm weight loss noting that some people want to lose weight quickly while others want to maintain their weight loss for years to come the health experts rated weight watchers as the best diet on both accounts scoring 4 out of 5 for shortterm weight loss and 35 out of 5 for longterm weight loss a highfat diet without the weight gain study says its possible researchers say that there could be a way to avoid weight gain due to a highfat diet read now one of the longestrunning wellknown commercial diets weight watchers incorporates a points system wherein foods and beverages are assigned points based on their nutritional values and dieters are assigned a daily points allowance according to us news world report the expert panel `` appreciated the programs support system which helps dieters keep the pounds off '' the volumetrics diet came in at second place for best weight loss diet scoring 38 out of 5 for shortterm weight loss and 33 out of 5 for longterm weight loss designed by barbara rolls who is a professor of nutrition working at pennsylvania state university in centre county the volumetrics diet focuses on putting foods with lowenergy density such as lowfat milk grains and nonstarchy fruits and vegetables at the forefront of ones diet as well as limiting foods with highenergy density the best diets for heart health heart disease is the leading cause of death for men and women in the us killing around 610000 people in the country every year a poor diet can increase the risk of heart disease because eating food high in fat can lead to high blood pressure high cholesterol levels and obesity which are major risk factors for the condition but which eating plan is best for a healthy heart for this category the health experts analyzed each of the 40 diets and gave them average hearthealth ratings the dietary approaches to stop hypertension dash diet took first place in this category developed by the national heart lung and blood institute a part of the national institutes of health nih the dash diet is high in fruits vegetables whole grains fish poultry and lowfat dairy but it limits foods high in sugar and saturated and trans fats the dash diet was also ranked the best overall diet the mediterranean diet which emphasizes consuming fish and seafood at least twice weekly alongside regular consumption of fruits vegetables legumes and whole grains took joint second place for best hearthealthy diet alongside the ornish diet with the ornish diet fat is limited to 10 percent of daily calories and foods are divided into five groups from the least to most healthful the best diets for diabetes the mediterranean diet not only ranked highly for one of the best hearthealthy diets but it also took the crown for the best diabetes diet scoring 37 out of 5 it is estimated that around 303 million people in the us are living with diabetes wherein blood glucose levels become too high due to the bodys inability to produce or effectively use insulin although eating a healthful diet is important for all of us people with diabetes need to be extra cautious skipping meals or eating the wrong foods may lead to problematic highs and lows in blood glucose levels according to the panel `` the mediterranean diet is a great option for preventing or controlling diabetes some research has shown that diabetics on a mediterranean diet may improve their levels of hemoglobin a1c a measure of blood sugar over time '' the dash diet makes yet another appearance here ranking second in the best diabetes diet category with the experts noting that `` its menu looks a lot like widely accepted nutritional guidelines for those with the condition '' whichever eating plan that you decide is best for you its important to note that physical activity is just as important as the foods you eat current guidelines recommend that adults should engage in at least 150 minutes of moderateintensity or 75 minutes of vigorousintensity aerobic activity every weeka small pilot study of older people suggests that taking a daily supplement of a nutrient that is present naturally in foods may improve artery health and blood pressure a certain type of supplement may promote healthy arterial aging and reduced blood pressure the researchers at the university of colorado boulder found that the supplement called nicotinamide riboside mimics some of the effects of caloric restriction and activates several identical biological pathways studies of caloric restriction which have been done mainly in rodents and fruit flies and not so much in humans indicate that reducing daily calorie intake by a third may delay the aging process and lengthen lifespan the new study found that taking nicotinamide riboside supplements significantly improved blood pressure in people with mild hypertension or elevated blood pressure should the results be confirmed in a larger clinical trial the researchers think that they could have important implications in biomedicine such as increasing treatment options for elevated blood pressure elevated blood pressure and stage 1 high blood pressure are now defined as a blood pressure of 12080 or 13989 millimeters of mercury respectively which although is not high enough to justify medication is high enough to raise the risk for a heart attack or stroke currently the recommended options for people with elevated blood pressure include changes to diet and increasing physical activity senior study author doug seals who is a professor and researcher in the department of integrative physiology and his colleagues report their findings in a paper due to be published in the journal nature communications stiff arteries blood pressure and aging in a western culture stiffer arteries and the high blood pressure that results from them as we age is so common that it is accepted as a normal consequence of aging for example the american heart associations aha explanation of high blood pressure states `` the normal aging process can cause the big elastic arteries to become stiff over time '' in the united states an estimated 103 million adults have high blood pressure and this figure is expected to rise as the population continues to age however there is evidence that stiff arteries and high blood pressure are not necessarily a normal consequence of aging although genetics plays a role preserving artery health as we reach our 70s and beyond also depends on things that we can do something about such as lifestyle and diet nicotinamide riboside nicotinamide riboside is a trace nutrient present in certain foods such as cows milk and in higher concentrations in dietary supplement form studies have indicated that the nutrient contains `` unique properties as a vitamin b3 '' that include raising insulin sensitivity boosting the effects of exercise protecting the brain and resisting the harmful effects of a highfat diet high cholesterol in late life may mean better brain health learn how having a total cholesterol level higher in later life than it was in midlife is linked to a lower risk of marked cognitive decline read now for their study prof seals and his colleagues recruited 24 lean and healthy men and women from the boulder area their ages ranged from 55 to 79 and they were put into two groups one of the groups took 500 milligrams of nicotinamide riboside chloride twice per day for 6 weeks then spent another 6 weeks taking a placebo the other group followed the opposite pattern they took a placebo for 6 weeks and then a twicedaily 500milligram dose of nicotinamide riboside chloride for another 6 weeks the team analyzed blood samples that the subjects gave at the end of each treatment period and they took other `` physiological measurements '' at these times there were no serious side effects an evolutionary survival mechanism the results showed that taking 1000 milligrams of nicotinamide riboside each day increased levels of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide nad+ by 60 percent nad+ is a compound that activates sirtuins a group of enzymes thought to be responsible for the beneficial effects that calorie restriction has on healthy aging and longevity the compound levels of which tend to wane with age is involved in many of the bodys metabolic processes there is a theory which is supported by research that our bodies are programmed by evolution to conserve nad+ when food is scarce and that this is activated when we restrict calorie intake more recent research has also begun to investigate the possibility that older adults might regain this protective property and age more healthily by taking supplements of `` nad+ precursors '' such as nicotinamide riboside the results also found that nicotinamide riboside supplementation caused a drop in systolic blood pressure of 10 points in 13 of the participants who had elevated blood pressure or stage 1 high blood pressure this represents a 25 percent reduction in the risk of having a heart attack more work now needed to confirm findings the researchers conclude that their paper is a step forward in highlighting the potential benefits of nicotinamide riboside supplementation in older adults however they point out that there is still a lot of work to do to confirm that it is safe and effective they hope to investigate the specific impact of nicotinamide riboside on artery health and blood pressure more robustly in a larger clinical trial in the meantime another trial is about to investigate the effect of the supplement in older people with mild cognitive impairment a condition that often precedes alzheimers disease '' this was the first ever study to give this novel compound to humans over a period of time we found that it is welltolerated and appears to activate some of the same key biological pathways that calorie restriction does '' prof doug seals the study was partfunded by chromadex who make the supplements that the researchers usedapps are available for everything these days from shopping to entertainment and travel apps that claim to help look after your mental health and wellbeing are also available so we have selected the best apps for mental health mental health apps may help with conditions such as anxiety and depression as well as enhance psychological wellbeing approximately 483 million adults in the united states are faced with a mental health condition each year and 98 million of those are serious conditions that limit the activities of everyday life among us adults aged 18–44 mood disorders such as depression and bipolar disorder are now the third most common reason for hospitalizations furthermore those who live with severe mental illness are more likely to face chronic medical conditions and die around 25 years earlier exercising regularly and eating a healthful diet can boost mental health and wellbeing significantly help to reduce symptoms of depression anxiety and stress and increase endorphins responsible for happiness apps focus on protecting or improving mental health using methods including meditation hypnosis cognitive behavioral therapy cbt and providing a valuable support network medical news today have put together a list of the top 10 apps that can help to enhance your wellbeing and look after your mental health calm android free iphone free calm was branded as apples `` app of the year '' in 2017 the app is designed to reduce anxiety improve sleep and help you to feel happier calm focuses on the four key areas of meditation breathing sleep and relaxation with the aim of bringing joy clarity and peace to your daily life the app delivers meditations that can help you to destress as well as breathing programs music and sounds from nature to relax your mind and body and promote better sleep calm is the perfect app if you are new to meditation but it also offers programs for more advanced users meditation sessions are available in lengths of 3–25 minutes to fit in with your schedule headspace android free iphone free headspace uses mindfulness and meditation to help you perform at your best each day the apps mission is to provide you with the essential tools to achieve a happier healthier life whether you need to build healthier relationships find a place of calm keep your mind fit or reduce stress headspace has hundreds of themed mindfulness and meditation sessions to support you the app reports that meditation reduces daily stress and improves focus and attention what is more using headspace is suggested to enhance compassionate behavior toward others in just 3 weeks moodnotes iphone $ 399 moodnotes is a thought journal and mood diary the app can be used to capture your feelings and improve your thinking habits through the implementation of cbt and positive psychology track your mood and increase selfawareness of what influences it learn to recognize `` traps '' in your thinking and ways to rethink the situation if you happen to enter a `` thinking trap '' moodnotes will provide suggestions and useful perspectives to reduce stress and enhance wellbeing progress is viewable in the helpful `` insights '' dashboard googleadslotinfopush { '' slotname '' mnt_dlb1 '' slotcontainer '' mnt_dlb1_container } moodpath android free iphone free moodpath is your pocketsized mental health companion whether you are facing a rough patch or have concerns about your mental health the apps goal is to support you through the difficult times and guide you out the other side moodpath asks daily questions in order to assess your wellbeing and screen for symptoms of depression the screening progress aims to increase your awareness of your thoughts emotions and feelings after a period of 2 weeks the app generates an electronic document that you can discuss with a healthcare professional more than 150 videos and psychological exercises are available to help you understand your mood and strengthen your mental health pacifica android free iphone free pacifica is an app with anxiety and stress in mind it provides a toolbox to deal with daily anxiety and stress along with a highly supportive community of likeminded individuals pacifica helps you to break cycles of unhelpful thoughts feelings and behaviors through methods such as cbt mindfulness meditation mood tracking and relaxation the app houses audio lessons and activities that help you to cope with stress and depression and it sets daily challenges to help you tackle anxiety one day at a time and reach your longterm goals superbetter android free iphone free superbetter is a game focusing on increasing resilience and the ability to remain strong optimistic and motivated when presented with challenging obstacles in life a study by the university of pennsylvania in philadelphia found that when people played superbetter for 30 days their mood improved symptoms of anxiety and depression decreased and selfbelief to achieve goals increased the app will help you to adopt new habits improve your skills strengthen relationships complete meaningful projects and achieve lifelong dreams superbetter also has the potential to help you beat depression and anxiety cope with chronic illness and recover from posttraumatic stress disorder ptsd 7 cups android free iphone free if you are feeling lonely sad stressed or worried 7 cups could be the perfect app for you it provides online therapy and emotional support for anxiety and depression there are more than 160000 trained listeners and licensed therapists who are available to anonymously speak with 247 speak your mind and confide in listeners without the fear of being judged these listeners can be searched for based on their experience or their specialties such as bullying panic attacks eating disorders relationship breakups and many more affordable therapy with an online therapist can commence onetoone in a confidential setting anxiety relief hypnosis android free iphone free anxiety relief hypnosis is an app suggested to help improve relaxation and reduce anxiety within just 1–3 weeks of use the apps developers say that hypnosis can decrease anxious thoughts and enhance your response to relaxation which in turn resets your behavior and enables an improved response to stress the app provides an audio session read by a certified hypnotherapist together with calming music and sounds from nature to aid relaxation the `` awaken at end '' feature can be disabled to allow you to fall into restful sleep at bedtime happify android free iphone free happify is a space to overcome negative thoughts and stress and build resilience whether you are feeling stressed anxious or sad happify helps you to regain control of your thoughts and feelings in fact 86 percent of the apps users report feeling better about their lives after 2 months of using it happify employs techniques and evidencebased interventions in the areas of cbt positive psychology and mindfulness to help you break old and unhealthful patterns and form new healthful habits the app offers activities and games to improve your life satisfaction and ability to fight negativity your emotional wellbeing is calculated as a happiness score that you can improve upon each week talkspace android free iphone free talkspace is a counseling and therapy app that connects users with a convenient affordable and confidential way to deal with anxiety stress depression relationship issues and chronic illness a free consultation is provided with a matching agent to identify the ideal therapist for your needs based on several factors more than 1000 licensed therapists are available who specialize in anxiety phobia depression domestic violence ptsd and more after upgrading and becoming a member access is given to a secure chat room wherein you can raise and discuss your worries with your private counselor the apps pricing plans are described as being approximately 80 percent lower than traditional officebased appointments how to be happy in 2018 find out how to maintain your happiness this year read nowcancer is the leading cause of death across the globe for years now researchers have led meticulous studies focused on how to stop this deadly disease in its tracks how close are we to finding more effective treatments how far has cancer research come the world health organization who note that worldwide nearly 1 in 6 deaths are down to cancer in the united states alone the national cancer institute nci estimated 1688780 new cancer cases and 600920 cancerrelated deaths in 2017 currently the most common types of cancer treatment are chemotherapy radiotherapy tumor surgery and in the case prostate cancer and breast cancer hormonal therapy however other types of treatment are beginning to pick up steam therapies that on their own or in combination with other treatments are meant to help defeat cancer more efficiently and ideally have fewer side effects innovations in cancer treatment aim to address a set of issues that will typically face healthcare providers and patients including aggressive treatment accompanied by unwanted side effects tumor recurrence after treatment surgery or both and aggressive cancers that are resilient to widely utilized treatments below we review some of the most recent cancer research breakthroughs that give us renewed hope that better therapies and prevention strategies will soon follow suit boosting the immune systems arsenal one type of therapy that has attracted a lot of attention recently is immunotherapy which aims to reinforce our own bodies existing arsenal against foreign bodies and harmful cells our immune systems response to the spread of cancer tumors but many types of cancer cell are so dangerous because they have ways of `` duping '' the immune system either into ignoring them altogether or else into giving them a `` helping hand '' lung cancer tumor growth halved with new approach to stop cancer from spreading we may have to look at mysterious noncoding molecules a recent study suggests read now therefore some types of aggressive cancer are able to spread more easily and become resistant to chemotherapy or radiotherapy however thanks to in vitro and in vivo experiments researchers are now learning how they might be able to `` deactivate '' the cancer cells protective systems a study published last year in nature immunology found that macrophages or white blood cells that are normally tasked with `` eating up '' cellular debris and other harmful foreign `` objects '' failed to obliterate the superaggressive cancer cells that was because in their interaction with the cancer cells the macrophages read not one but two signals meant to repel their `` cleansing '' action this knowledge however also showed the scientists the way forward by blocking the two relevant signaling pathways they reenabled the white blood cells to do their work therapeutic viruses and innovative vaccines a surprising weapon in the fight against cancer could be therapeutic viruses as revealed by a team from the united kingdom earlier this year in their experiments they managed to use a reovirus to attack brain cancer cells while leaving healthy cells alone '' this is the first time it has been shown that a therapeutic virus is able to pass through the brainblood barrier '' explained the study authors which `` opens up the possibility that this type of immunotherapy could be used to treat more people with aggressive brain cancers '' another area for improvement in immunotherapy is `` dendritic vaccines '' a strategy wherein dendritic cells which play a key role in the bodys immune response are collected from a persons body `` armed '' with tumorspecific antigens which will teach them to `` hunt '' and destroy relevant cancer cells and injected back into the body to boost the immune system in a new study researchers in switzerland identified a way to improve the action of these dendritic vaccines by creating artificial receptors able to recognize and `` abduct '' tiny vesicles that have been linked to cancer tumors spread in the body by attaching these artificial receptors to the dendritic cells in the `` vaccines '' the therapeutic cells are enabled to recognize harmful cancer cells with more accuracy importantly recent studies have shown that immunotherapy may work best if delivered in tandem with chemotherapy specifically if the chemotherapy drugs are delivered first and they are followed up with immunotherapy but this approach does have some pitfalls it is difficult to control the effects of this combined method so sometimes healthy tissue may be attacked alongside cancer tumors however scientists from two institutions in north carolina have developed a substance that once injected into the body becomes gellike a `` bioresponsive scaffold system '' the scaffold can hold both chemotherapy and immunotherapy drugs at once releasing them systematically into primary tumors this method allows for a better control of both therapies ensuring that the drugs act on the targeted tumor alone the nanoparticle revolution speaking of specially developed tools for delivering drugs straight to the tumor and hunting down micro tumors with accuracy and efficiency the past couple of years have seen a `` boom '' in nanotechnology and nanoparticle developments for cancer treatments nanoparticles could be a gamechanger in cancer treatment nanoparticles are microscopic particles that have garnered so much attention in clinical research among other fields because they bring us the chance to develop precise less invasive methods of tackling disease vitally they can target cancer cells or cancer tumors without harming healthy cells in the surrounding environment some nanoparticles have now been created to provide very focused hyperthermic treatment which is a type of therapy that uses hot temperatures to make cancer tumors shrink last year scientists from china and the uk managed to come up with a type of `` selfregulating '' nanoparticle that was able to expose tumors to heat while avoiding contact with healthy tissue '' this could potentially be a gamechanger in the way we treat people who have cancer '' said one of the researchers in charge of this project these tiny vehicles can also be used to target cancer stemlike cells which are undifferentiated cells that have been linked to the resilience of certain types of cancer in the face of traditional treatments such as chemotherapy thus nanoparticles can be `` loaded '' with drugs and set to `` hunt down '' cancer stem cells to prevent the growth or recurrence of tumors scientists have experimented with drugfilled nanoparticles in the treatment of various types of cancer including breast cancer and endometrial cancer no less importantly minuscule vehicles called `` nanoprobes '' can be used to detect the presence of micrometastases which are secondary tumors so tiny that they can not be seen using traditional methods dr steven k libutti director of the rutgers cancer institute of new jersey in new brunswick calls micrometastases `` the achilles heel of surgical management for cancer '' and argues that nanoprobes `` go a long way to solving such problems '' tumor starvation strategies another type of strategy that researchers have been investigating of late is that of `` starving '' tumors of the nutrients they need to grow and spread this scientists point out could be a saving grace in the case of aggressive resilient cancers that can not effectively be eradicated otherwise one novel method of attacking cancer is by starving cancer cells to death three different studies whose results were all published in january this year looked at ways of cutting off cancers nutritional supplies one of these studies looked at ways of stopping glutamine a naturally occurring amino acid from feeding cancer cells certain cancers such as breast lung and colon are known to use this amino acid to support their growth by blocking cancer cells access to glutamine the researchers managed to maximize the impact of oxidative stress a process that eventually induces cell death on these cells some aggressive types of breast cancer may be halted by stopping the cells from `` feeding '' on a particular enzyme that helps them to produce the energy they need to thrive another way of depleting cancer cells of energy is by blocking their access to vitamin b2 as researchers from the university of salford in the uk have observed as one study author says `` this is hopefully the beginning of an alternative approach to halting cancer stem cells '' this strategy could help individuals receiving cancer treatment to avoid the toxic side effects of chemotherapy cancer treatments and epigenetics epigenetics refers to the changes caused in our bodies by alterations in gene expression which dictate whether certain characteristics appear or if certain `` actions '' are affected at a biological level according to research that addressed the impact of such changes many cancers as well as the behaviors of cancer cells are determined by epigenetic factors '' recent advances in the field of epigenetics have shown that human cancer cells harbor global epigenetic abnormalities in addition to numerous genetic alterations '' '' these genetic and epigenetic alterations interact at all stages of cancer development working together to promote cancer progression '' thus it is crucial for specialists to understand when and where to intervene and the expression of which genes they may need to switch on or off depending on their role in the development of cancer one study for instance found that the gene responsible for the advent of huntingtons disease produces a set of molecules whose action may actually prevent cancer from occurring now the researchers challenge is to channel the therapeutic potential of this process without triggering huntingtons disease however the scientists are hopeful '' we believe a shortterm treatment cancer therapy for a few weeks might be possible '' says the studys senior author another recent study was able to establish that estrogenreceptor positive breast cancers that become resistant to chemotherapy gain their resilience through genetic mutations that `` confer a metastatic advantage to the tumor '' but this knowledge also gave researchers the `` break '' that they needed to come up with an improved treatment for such stubborn tumors a combination therapy that delivers the chemotherapeutic drug fulvestrant alongside an experimental enzyme inhibitor what does this all mean cancer research is running at full speed taking advantage of all the technological advances that science has achieved over recent years but what does that mean in terms of coming up with a cure for cancer whether or not there will ever be a cure for all cancer types is currently a matter of strong debate although promising studies are published and covered by the media almost every day cancer types vary immensely this makes it very difficult to say that an approach that works for one type will be adaptable to all also while there is much emerging research promising more effective treatments most of these projects are still in their early stages having conducted in vitro and in vivo experiments some potential treatments still have a long way to go before clinical trials in human patients still that doesnt mean we should lose all hope some researchers explain that these efforts should make us optimistic while we may not be at the stage where we can claim that cancer can easily be eradicated our furthered knowledge and ever more precise tools keep us ahead of the game and improve our odds in the fight against this diseasenew research published in the journal aging finds a compound that stops cancer cells from spreading by starving them of vitamin b2 the findings may revolutionize traditional chemotherapy current chemotherapy has a wide range of serious side effects but that may be about to change suggests new research a team of britishbased researchers set out to find a nontoxic therapeutic agent that targets the mitochondria of cancer cells mitochondria are energyproducing organelles found inside each cell the compound recently found by the scientists can stop cancer stemlike cells from proliferating by interfering with their energycreating process inside the mitochondria the team was led by prof michael lisanti the chair of translational medicine at the university of salford in the united kingdom and the new study can be accessed here starving cancer cells of energy prof lisanti and his colleagues used drugscreening to identify the compound which is called diphenyleneiodonium chloride dpi as the researchers explain various cell assays and other cell culture experiments revealed that dpi reduced over 90 percent of the energy produced in the cells mitochondria dpi achieved this by blocking vitamin b2 also known as riboflavin which depleted the cells of energy '' our observation is that dpi is selectively attacking the cancer stem cells by effectively creating a vitamin deficiency in other words by turning off energy production in cancer stem cells we are creating a process of hibernation '' prof michael lisanti the cancer stem cells are the ones that produce the tumor `` its extraordinary '' continues prof lisanti `` the cells just sit there as if in a state of suspended animation '' importantly dpi proved to be nontoxic for socalled `` bulk '' cancer cells which are largely thought to be nontumorigenic is chemo at the heart of cancer regrowth paradoxically the very treatment that is supposed to stop cancer from spreading sometimes enables it to do so read now this suggests that the compound might be successful where current chemotherapy fails the team explains `` dpi treatment can be used to acutely confer a mitochondrialdeficient phenotype which we show effectively depletes cancer stemlike cells from the heterogeneous cancer cell population '' '' these findings have significant therapeutic implications for potently targeting cancer stemlike cells while minimizing toxic side effects '' they add a new era of chemotherapy '' we believe '' say the scientists `` that dpi is one of the most potent and highly selective cancer stemlike cells inhibitors discovered to date '' the findings are particularly significant given the dire need for nontoxic cancer therapies and the serious side effects of conventional chemotherapy '' the beauty of dpi is that it makes the cancer stem cells metabolically inflexible so that they will be highly susceptible to many other drugs '' explains prof lisanti study coauthor prof federica sotgia also comments on the significance of the recent findings saying `` in terms of chemotherapies for cancer we clearly need something better than what we have at present and this is hopefully the beginning of an alternative approach to halting cancer stem cells '' in fact the authors specialize in finding alternative nontoxic therapies and they hope that their most recent findings will mark the beginning of a new era of chemotherapy perhaps one that uses nontoxic molecules to target the mitochondrial activity of cancer stemlike cells the researchers propose to call these new molecules `` mitoflavoscins ''periods usually arrive once each month but the exact date flow cramp severity and accompanying symptoms are not quite that consistent for this very reason the app market is flooded with period trackers that aim to offer insight into your monthly cycle period tracking apps can help you to learn more about your cycle and plan for future periods bleeding occurs every 28 days for the majority of women but it is common for the menstrual cycle to be either shorter or longer in duration and for bleeding to start anywhere from day 21 to day 40 period length may also vary and last for 3–8 days with an average of 5 days bleeding is often heaviest on days 1 and 2 and starts to become lighter thereafter tracking your period can be useful for several reasons period tracking can help you to get to know your own body and cycle and observe any symptoms such as mood swings or headaches that may occur during a particular phase of your cycle period tracking can help to identify any changes to your menstrual cycle that may be an indicator of potential health issues furthermore using period tracking apps can tell you when you are likely to be most fertile if you are avoiding pregnancy or trying to become pregnant there are hundreds of apps that track and analyze the menstrual cycle so how do you know which one is the best fit for you medical news today have tried and tested apps galore to bring you a selection of the top 10 apps to start tracking your period today period calendar android free iphone free period calendar can help to track and predict your period plus provide information on your fertile window and potential ovulation date in addition to the basic menstrual cycle tracking function the app can be used to record temperature intercourse birth control weight cervical mucus mood and any other symptoms the pill reminder ensures that you will never forget a dose ever again whether you need to remember to take medications supplements birth control pills or even an injection the pill tracker can be set up to remind you flo period tracker android free iphone free if you are wondering when you last had a period or would like to know when your next one is due you can easily find out using flo flo uses machine learning to accurately and reliably predict menstruation and ovulation using the apps bold and simple calendar you will be able to log how you are feeling your symptoms sex drive and menstruation flow the app can also be used to track sleep water consumption and physical activity the insights dashboard helps you to learn more about your body and cycle and it also provides personalized health insights each day clue android free iphone free clue has been ranked as the top period and ovulation tracking app by the obstetrics gynecology journal which is a publication of the american college of obstetricians and gynecologists clue uses science to help its users to identify unique patterns in their menstrual cycle with the apps period tracker multiple mood trackers health logs and exercise trackers your health and menstrual cycle will no longer be a mystery the developers promise to be inclusive of all ages and never use butterflies flowers euphemisms or pink the apps unique algorithm learns from the data that you add which means that the more you use clue the smarter it will become my calendar android free iphone free my calendar is a sophisticated elegant and very customizable period tracker it can help those with irregular cycles as well as people who have worries about conceiving birth control and contraception with my calendar you can track regular and irregular periods temperature weight moods symptoms and blood flow with its discreet reminders you can be prepared for approaching periods along with ovulation and fertile days you can access all your essential information using the health tracker at a glance and the calendar can be passwordprotected to ensure that your information remains private glow android free iphone free glow can track your period and record your symptoms mood sexual activity and medications glows datadriven menstrual and ovulation calculator helps women to take control of their reproductive health the app can forecast periods and ovulation and its predictions become smarter over time not only can the app help women who are avoiding or attempting pregnancy but it also helps those who are undergoing fertility treatments such as intrauterine insemination and in vitro fertilization you can make charts of your menstrual and fertility data set medication birth control and ovulation reminders as well as log more than 40 different health signals glow also offers a subscription to unlock comparative insights premium articles private messaging and premium support eve android free iphone free eve is a savvy period tracker that predicts upcoming periods and your chances of pregnancy discover trends in your cycle by logging your moods and symptoms and view your health data in eyecatching charts with eve you can review past periods forecast future periods and ovulation and visualize your cycle history in a new way with eves interactive staircase the app provides access to a community where you can discuss periods sex and health if you are concerned about anything at all ask the community no subject is off limits and you can learn from those who have had similar experiences period tracker lite android free iphone free the period tracker lite app makes logging menstrual cycles quick and easy press a button at the start of each period and period tracker lite will record your data and use the average of 3 months worth of data to calculate your next period take notes each day about your symptoms such as flow cramps bloating backache headache and tender breasts your weight temperature and a choice of more than 30 moods can also be selected period dates fertility days and ovulation are all shown in a simple monthview calendar the app provides comprehensive charts that illustrate weight changes temperature period length cycle length and symptoms period plus iphone free period plus can help you to keep in touch with the duration of your menstrual cycles and tells you when the next one will begin the app sends you reminders of your next period and fertile window helping you to get to know your cycle and plan ahead with birth control pregnancy planning and even vacations period plus tracks period duration and intensity cramp intensity breast tenderness breakouts migraines basal body temperature cervical mucus sexual activity exercise pregnancy test results sleep patterns and more my cycles android free iphone free regardless of whether you are trying to conceive or become an expert on when your next period is due my cycles can help my cycles tracks periods in a handy calendar and predicts future ones wherever you are you can track your period symptoms mood and medications with my cycles in an instant record your periods view them at a glance with the easytoread calendar and plan periods fertile days and ovulation for the next 12 months if you are trying to get pregnant the app lets you know when your chances of conceiving are higher with helpful reminders likewise it tells you when to use extra protection if you are not trying to conceive cycles iphone free the cycles app is a simple period and fertility tracker that requires little input irrespective of having regular or irregular periods with cycles all you need to do is turn the dial on the first day of your period and thats it the app automatically adjusts your cycle length cycles is designed so that you can invite your partner to the app to keep up with your cycle this feature is useful so that your partner can provide emotional support plan trips and romantic evenings and know when your most fertile days are if you are trying to conceive the app uses scientifically backed fertility tracking that predicts fertility with an accuracy of up to 95 percent optional password protection keeps your information secure from prying eyes seven tips for relieving period bloating here are some tips about how to relieve periodrelating bloating read nowwant to get fit this year but dont know where to start we have chosen the best fitness blogs to empower you and help to get you started on your journey to tiptop physical fitness fitness blogs aim to inspire empower and motivate you to reach your health and fitness goals getting up off the couch and taking part in regular physical activity is one of the most important things you can do to ensure you remain healthy regular exercise can help to control your weight strengthen your bones and muscles and reduce your risk of cardiovascular disease type 2 diabetes and some cancers furthermore being active improves your mood mental health mobility and ability to complete tasks as an older adult as well as increases your chances of living longer adults are recommended to do at least 150 minutes of moderateintensity physical activity each week to achieve substantial health benefits and increase to 300 minutes for more extensive benefits if you are stuck on where to begin or are worried about getting injured the good news is that aerobic activity such as brisk walking is considered to be safe for most people hundreds of fitness blogs are also available to help you on your way and provide tips ideas and information on the best types of activity to boost fitness and instructions on how to do them medical news today have trawled through the many fitness blogs out there to bring you the top 10 fitness blogs for 2018 myfitnesspal blog myfitnesspal is a smartphone app and website that records physical activity and diet the app works out the optimal intake of calories and nutrients for the user to accomplish their goals and it uses elements of gaming to motivate them myfitnesspals blog focuses on providing easytoread information on eating psychology nutrition weight loss fitness inspiration workout guides and motivational support through the victory stories on the blog fitness posts include seven tips to lift weights without causing injury songs that should feature on your 2018 running playlist and brain and bodyboosting moves that you should add to your next walk visit the myfitnesspal blog natalie jill fitness natalie jill fitness was founded after natalie jill gained weight straight after losing her house retiring and ending her marriage she turned her life around and in the process became an inspiration to others natalie specializes in fitness weight loss healthy lifestyles and body weight training natalie coaches motivates and empowers people to stop making excuses and instead make solutions to become the best version of themselves recent posts on her blog include a bootybuilding workout to activate your glutes an upper body workout using just your body weight and how to do a chin up visit the natalie jill fitness blog ace ace is an acronym for the american council on exercise ace are a nonprofit organization that certifiy exercise professionals and health coaches aces vision is to get people moving and provide scientifically backed education to fitness professionals and health enthusiasts to make an impact on preventable diseases related to inactivity by 2035 their expert articles cover fitness topics such as exercises to improve agility lower body exercises to complete instead of doing squats and the many types of strength and their benefits visit the ace blog born fitness adam bornstein developed born fitness with the aim of taking the stress out of health nutrition and fitness whether you hope to lose weight gain muscle eat more healthfully or live longer born fitness provide solutions to fit your needs the born fitness team will help you to identify the diets strategies exercises and workouts that are best suited to you so that you can apply them to your life achieve your goals and live stronger and longer activities are available on the blog to suit all levels of fitness from beginner to advanced training posts include how to incorporate resistance bands into your routine preventing knee back and shoulder injuries during your workouts and the truth about the 7minute workout visit the born fitness blog the fitnessista the fitnessista is a healthy lifestyle blog written by gina harney who is a fitness instructor personal trainer and weight loss specialist based in san diego ca gina is a mom of two and she shares snippets of her family life on the blog along with quick effective workouts and healthful recipes that are super speedy to put together the latest posts on the fitnessista include things to help with fitness motivation the barre hiit workout that you can practice anywhere and a strength and cardio workout that can be completed on a park bench visit the fitnessista blog suzanne bowen fitness suzanne bowen compiled all of the training that she had received and given over the course of 16 years and created suzanne bowen fitness suzanne is also the creator of barreamped which is an internationally taught barre fitness technique regardless of whether you havent exercised for a while or if you are a seasoned expert suzanne has workouts that range from 10 minutes to over an hour that are effective for everyone the blog provides challenges and workouts to boost your fitness levels such as the crunchless abs workout a light weight routine for the upper body and a rebounding workout and its benefits visit the suzanne bowen fitness blog knockedup fitness erica ziel is a mother of three and the founder of knockedup fitness erica is a personal trainer and expert for fitnessinfused pilates with more than 10 years experience training numerous clients erica is an expert in prenatal and postnatal training and teaching women how to strengthen their core muscles for an easier pregnancy delivery and recovery the knockedup fitness blog delivers real and relevant topics to the busy mom or momtobe with articles such as why its important to properly strengthen your core how to prevent and relieve back pain during pregnancy and how movement can prepare your body for birth visit the knockedup fitness blog lisa gulley established workout mommy in 2007 to provide health and fitness information for moms lisa says that as a mom of four boys she is fully aware of how being a mom requires you to look after someone other than yourself 247 and that finding the time to exercise is a challenge lisa aims to provide the inspiration motivation and ideas you need to fit fitness exercise and health into your busy schedule and keep your sanity in check posts on workout mommy include ways to overcome a negative mindset tips on how to start a fitness routine and the types of cardio exercises that are best for women visit the workout mommy blog love sweat fitness katie dunlop is a certified personal trainer group fitness instructor and the creator of love sweat fitness she started love sweat fitness with the aim of inspiring women all over the world to find their happy and healthy body after college katie found herself overweight by 45 pounds and was fed up with trendy workouts and fad diets she decided to take her fitness and health into her own hands lost her excess weight and identified her true passion for helping women to reach their goals inspiring posts on katies blog include ways to make your morning workout the best part of your day five tips for a happier and healthier you this year and how to train for a 10k run visit the love sweat fitness blog nerd fitness nerd fitness say that they are a community of misfits mutants and underdogs that are ready to help you on your fitness journey whether you are overweight and frustrated in danger of serious health issues want to become a healthier parent or just want to look after or feel better about yourself nerd fitness aim to help you to make small changes so that you can live a happier healthier and more fulfilling life blog posts include the main differences between weight loss success and failure the number of calories you burn while walking and how to get strong like logan with the wolverine workout visit the nerd fitness blog the 10 best fitness apps pair these blogs with the apps listed here to boost your chances of becoming fit and healthy read nowa new study may have revealed a possible new prevention and treatment strategy for osteoarthritis which is one of the most common and debilitating agerelated diseases in the united states researchers suggest that increasing levels of foxo proteins could be one way to prevent and treat osteoarthritis researchers at the scripps research institute tsri in san diego ca reveal that proteins called foxo are key for joint health by boosting the levels of these foxo proteins they believe that it might be possible to treat osteoarthritis or even stop the disease from developing senior study author dr martin lotz from the department of molecular medicine at tsri and his team recently reported their results in the journal science translational medicine osteoarthritis also referred to as degenerative joint disease is estimated to affect more than 30 million adults in the united states making it the most common type of arthritis the condition is characterized by a breakdown of cartilage which is the tissue that cushions the joints of the bones osteoarthritis most commonly affects the knee hip and hand joints in a previous study dr lotz and team found that foxo levels in joint cartilage are reduced for this latest study the researchers sought to find out more about how foxo proteins affect joint health the effects of foxo deficiency in mice the researchers reached their findings by studying mice that were lacking foxo proteins in their joint cartilage compared with control mice the scientists found that foxodeficient mice experienced degeneration of the joints at a significantly younger age what is more the rodents with foxo deficiency showed greater susceptibility to cartilage damage during a treadmill test and they were also more likely to develop posttraumatic osteoarthritis due to knee injury osteoarthritis could this algae extract lead to a cure researchers reveal how an algae extract may offer a cure for osteoarthritis read now upon further investigation the scientists found that the foxodeficient mice showed abnormalities in a process called autophagy which is a natural process by which cells get rid of any unwanted or damaged components in order to maintain their health and carry out any repairs foxo deficiency also led to abnormalities in the processes that protect our cells against damage caused by free radicals additionally the study revealed that mice lacking foxo proteins failed to produce the required levels of a protein called lubricin which helps to protect joint cartilage against wear and tear the reduced production of lubricin was linked to a reduction in healthy cells in the `` superficial zone '' which is a layer of cartilage in the knee joint boosting foxo may prevent osteoarthritis so why does foxo cause these issues the researchers found that foxo proteins regulate the expression of genes that are important for joint health including those that control inflammation and autophagy the absence of foxo proteins in the joint cartilage leads to an increase in inflammation and a decrease in autophagy meaning that cells are unable to repair any damage '' the housekeeping mechanisms which keep cells healthy were not working in these knockout mice '' says dr lotz for the final part of their study the scientists wanted to see whether boosting foxo levels could restore these `` housekeeping mechanisms '' by increasing foxo expression in cells taken from people with osteoarthritis the researchers were able to normalize the expression of genes associated with inflammation and autophagy and the production of lubricin was also restored the team now plans to create molecules that can increase foxo levels and assess their effects in experimental osteoarthritis models '' drugs that boost the expression and activity of foxo could be a strategy for preventing and treating osteoarthritis '' dr martin lotzaccording to the national institutes of health people have used marijuana or cannabis to treat their ailments for at least 3000 years however the food and drug administration have not deemed marijuana safe or effective in the treatment of any medical condition although cannabidiol a substance that is present in marijuana received approval in june 2018 as a treatment for some types of epilepsy marijuana is being increasingly legalized in the us but is it safe this tension between a widespread belief that marijuana is an effective treatment for a wide assortment of ailments and a lack of scientific knowledge on its effects has been somewhat exacerbated in recent times by a drive toward legalization twentynine states plus the district of columbia have now made marijuana available for medical and in some states recreational purposes a recent study published in the journal addiction also found that use of marijuana is increasing sharply across the united states although this rise may not be linked to the legalization of marijuana in participating states nevertheless this rise in use is prompting major public health concerns in this article we look at the scientific evidence weighing the medical benefits of marijuana against its associated health risks in an attempt to answer this simple question is marijuana good or bad what are the medical benefits of marijuana over the years research has yielded results to suggest that marijuana may be of benefit in the treatment of some conditions these are listed below chronic pain last year a large review from the national academies of sciences engineering and medicine assessed more than 10000 scientific studies on the medical benefits and adverse effects of marijuana one area that the report looked closely at was the use of medical marijuana to treat chronic pain chronic pain is a leading cause of disability affecting more than 25 million adults in the us the review found that marijuana or products containing cannabinoids which are the active ingredients in marijuana or other compounds that act on the same receptors in the brain as marijuana are effective at relieving chronic pain alcoholism and drug addiction another comprehensive review of evidence published last year in the journal clinical psychology review revealed that using marijuana may help people with alcohol or opioid dependencies to fight their addictions but this finding may be contentious the national academies of sciences review suggests that marijuana use actually drives increased risk for abusing and becoming dependent on other substances also the more that someone uses marijuana the more likely they are to develop a problem with using marijuana individuals who began using the drug at a young age are also known to be at increased risk of developing a problem with marijuana use depression posttraumatic stress disorder and social anxiety the review published in clinical psychology review assessed all published scientific literature that investigated the use of marijuana to treat symptoms of mental illness evidence to date suggests that marijuana could help to treat some mental health conditions its authors found some evidence supporting the use of marijuana to relieve depression and posttraumatic stress disorder symptoms that being said they caution that marijuana is not an appropriate treatment for some other mental health conditions such as bipolar disorder and psychosis the review indicates that there is some evidence to suggest that marijuana might alleviate symptoms of social anxiety but again this is contradicted by the national academies of sciences engineering and medicine review which instead found that regular users of marijuana may actually be at increased risk of social anxiety cancer evidence suggests that oral cannabinoids are effective against nausea and vomiting caused by chemotherapy and some small studies have found that smoked marijuana may also help to alleviate these symptoms alcohol more damaging to brain health than marijuana a recent study suggests that alcohol may cause more harm to the brain than marijuana read now some studies on cancer cells suggest that cannabinoids may either slow down the growth of or kill some types of cancer however early studies that tested this hypothesis in humans revealed that although cannabinoids are a safe treatment they are not effective at controlling or curing cancer multiple sclerosis the shortterm use of oral cannabinoids may improve symptoms of spasticity among people with multiple sclerosis but the positive effects have been found to be modest epilepsy in june 2018 the food and drug administration fda approved the use of a medication containing cannabidiol cbd to treat two rare severe and specific types of epilepsy called lennoxgastaut syndrome and dravet syndrome that are difficult to control with other types of medication this cbdbased drug is known as epidiolex cbd is one of many substances that occurs in cannabis it is not psychoactive the drug for treating these conditions involves a purified form of cbd the approval was based on the findings of research and clinical trials a study published in 2017 found that the use of cbd resulted in far fewer seizures among children with dravet syndrome compared with a placebo dravet syndrome seizures are prolonged repetitive and potentially lethal in fact 1 in 5 children with dravet syndrome do not reach the age of 20 years in the study 120 children and teenagers with dravet syndrome all of whom were aged between 2 and 18 were randomly assigned to receive an oral cbd solution or a placebo for 14 weeks along with their usual medication the researchers found that the children who received the cbd solution went from having around 12 seizures per month to an average of six seizures per month three children receiving cbd did not experience any seizures at all children who received the placebo also saw a reduction in seizures but this was slight their average number of seizures went down from 15 each month before the study to 14 seizures per month during the study the researchers say that this 39 percent reduction in seizure occurrence provides strong evidence that the compound can help people living with dravet syndrome and that their paper has the first rigorous scientific data to demonstrate this however the study also found a high rate of side effects linked to cbd more than 9 in 10 of the children treated with cbd experienced side effects most commonly vomiting fatigue and fever the patient information leaflet for epidiolex warns of side effects such as liver damage sedation and thoughts of suicide what are the health risks of marijuana at the other end of the spectrum is the plethora of studies that have found negative associations between marijuana use and health they are listed below mental health problems daily marijuana use is believed to exacerbate existing symptoms of bipolar disorder among people who have this mental health problem however the national academies of sciences engineering and medicine report suggests that among people with no history of the condition there is only limited evidence of a link between marijuana use and developing bipolar disorder moderate evidence suggests that regular marijuana users are more likely to experience suicidal thoughts and there is a small increased risk of depression among marijuana users marijuana use is likely to increase risk of psychosis including schizophrenia but a curious finding among people with schizophrenia and other psychoses is that a history of marijuana use is linked with improved performance on tests assessing learning and memory testicular cancer although there is no evidence to suggest any link between using marijuana and an increased risk for most cancers the national academies of sciences did find some evidence to suggest an increased risk for the slowgrowing seminoma subtype of testicular cancer respiratory disease regular marijuana smoking is linked to increased risk of chronic cough but `` it is unclear '' whether smoking marijuana worsens lung function or increases the risk of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or asthma a 2014 study that explored the relationship between marijuana use and lung disease suggested that it was plausible that smoking marijuana could contribute to lung cancer though it has been difficult to conclusively link the two the authors of that study published in the journal current opinion in pulmonary medicine conclude '' there is unequivocal evidence that habitual or regular marijuana smoking is not harmless a caution against regular heavy marijuana usage is prudent '' '' the medicinal use of marijuana is likely not harmful to lungs in low cumulative doses '' they add `` but the dose limit needs to be defined recreational use is not the same as medicinal use and should be discouraged '' so is marijuana good or bad for your health there is evidence that demonstrates both the harms and health benefits of marijuana yet despite the emergence over the past couple of years of very comprehensive uptodate reviews of the scientific studies evaluating the benefits and harms of the drug its clear that more research is needed to fully determine the public health implications of rising marijuana use more research is needed to confirm the harms and benefits of marijuana use many scientists and health bodies including the american cancer society acs support the need for further scientific research on the use of marijuana and cannabinoids to treat medical conditions however there is an obstacle to this marijuana is classed as a schedule i controlled substance by the drug enforcement administration which deters the study of marijuana and cannabinoids through its imposition of strict conditions on the researchers working in this area if you happen to live in a state where medical use of marijuana is legal you and your doctor will need to carefully consider these factors and how they relate to your illness and health history before using this drug for instance while there is some evidence to support the use for marijuana for pain relief you should certainly avoid marijuana if you have a history of mental health problems remember to always speak to your doctor before taking a new medicinewith so many diet types to choose from how do we know which one will suit us best one problem that may face us is deciding whether to go lowfat or lowcarb what does research have to say about it one of the most difficult decisions when it comes to weight loss diets is picking one that will work well for you keto diets mediterranean diets fasting diets there are so many options out there for people who want to lose weight however choosing a diet is tricky how do we know which one will work best for us or if the diet will work at all researchers at the stanford university school of medicine in california have recently conducted a study exploring one key aspect of this `` best diet '' question whether lowfat or lowcarb diets are more effective what lead study author prof christopher gardner and colleagues found however might only make the matter more complicated '' weve all heard stories '' says prof gardner `` of a friend who went on one diet it worked great and then another friend tried the same diet and it didnt work at all its because were all very different and were just starting to understand the reasons for this diversity '' '' maybe we shouldnt be asking whats the best diet but whats the best diet for whom '' prof christopher gardner prof gardner and team worked with 609 people aged 18–50 with an almost 5050 maletofemale ratio the participants were split into two groups and randomly assigned one of two diets lowcarb or lowfat all of the study participants followed their assigned diet for a full year the results of the researchers study are now published in the journal jama opt for natural foods in order to gain a better understanding of the factors that might drive weight gain and weight loss prof gardner and team also sequenced the participants genomes in doing so they looked for gene patterns that they could associate with the effectiveness fat or carb metabolism another test measured all the subjects insulin levels which have previously been associated with weight gain in some people cant keep the weight off this may be why why are our bodies so stubborn when it comes to weight management a new study sheds light read now for the first 8 weeks of their respective diets the participants were instructed to consume no more than 20 grams of either fats or carbs per day this the authors explain would be the equivalent of one and a half slices of wholewheat bread for carbs or a large handful of nuts in the case of fats from the second month of their diet onward the participants were allowed to make adjustments as needed adding back 5 –15 grams of either carbs or fat little by little the purpose of these adjustments was to encourage the participants to strike a nutritional balance that they would be comfortable adhering to in the long run beyond the `` confines '' of the study '' we wanted them to choose '' says prof gardner `` a lowfat or lowcarb diet plan that they could potentially follow forever rather than a diet that theyd drop when the study ended '' as the year drew to a close those who had been following a lowfat diet had a daily fat intake of 57 grams on average compared with 87 grams per day before the start of the study those on a lowcarb diet had a daily carb intake of approximately 132 grams versus 247 grams before the study started participants lost an average of 13 pounds over the 1year period the scientists were pleased with the impact that the study had on the participants dietary health stressing that one of its main achievements was to encourage them to switch to healthful sources of fats and carbs '' we made sure to tell everybody '' adds prof gardner `` regardless of which diet they were on to go to the farmers market and dont buy processed convenience food also we advised them to diet in a way that didnt make them feel hungry or deprived '' study opens the door to further questions after measuring participants baseline insulin levels and weight loss progress throughout the study the researchers saw that although they had all transitioned to more healthful eating habits there was still a lot of individual variance when it came to weight loss thus while some participants lost more than 60 pounds others gained 15–20 pounds however the researchers were unable to find any links between gene patterns or insulin output and a persons likelihood of thriving on a lowfat versus lowcarb diet '' this study closes the door on some questions but it opens the door to others we have gobs of data that we can use in secondary exploratory studies '' prof gardner notes the researchers next step from here therefore will be to look at all the different data collected throughout the current study and try to understand how individual dietary needs might be calculated in the future '' i still think there is an opportunity to discover some personalization to it now we just need to work on tying the pieces together '' says prof gardner in the meantime the researchers encourage people on a weight loss journey to just be more mindful about what they eat since that will be the first step to a more healthful lifestyle '' on both sides referring to lowcarb and lowfat dieters we heard from people who had lost the most weight that we had helped them change their relationship to food and that now they were more thoughtful about how they ate '' prof gardner concludesintermittent fasting has been gaining popularity among people looking to shed extra kilograms and maintain a healthy weight researchers argue that this type of diet may also slow down aging and disease intermittent fasting can help with weight management but might it also bring other health benefits in intermittent fasting what essentially takes place in the body is that one source of energy which can facilitate the accumulation of body fat is switched for another our bodies run on glucose or simple sugar but when we fast for a longer period of time that energy source becomes unavailable our system needs to identify a different kind of `` fuel '' that is when the body begins to convert certain types of body fat into fatty acids which are easily absorbed by the blood fatty acids in turn produce molecules called ketones which the body uses as its new source of energy stephen anton a researcher at the university of florida college of medicine in gainesville calls this process `` flipping the metabolic switch '' '' this switch '' explains anton `` can happen after a certain period of time fasting its a gradation in which your metabolism over time shifts to use higher and higher amounts of ketones for energy '' he and his team were interested to learn more about how this switch occurs and whether it could bring other health benefits alongside weight management for this purpose they reviewed numerous recent studies focused on the mechanisms and benefits of intermittent fasting the teams review published in the journal obesity suggests that intermittent fasting may be more healthful than other dieting strategies as ketones put less stress on cells than the byproducts of other dieting styles significant weight loss regardless of style anton and his colleagues explain that the switch usually begins to take place after 8–12 hours of fasting though in the case of individuals who practice intermittent fasting the fasting strategies vary the researchers focused on the two most common types of intermittent fasting diets the first of which is based on time restrictions for eating in it the dieter may fast for a number of hours per day for instance 16 hours while allowing themselves to eat anything theyd like over the remaining hours how intermittent fasting can increase weight loss how does intermittent fasting work read now for the second type of intermittent fasting dieters may choose to alternate days of total fasting with days when no food is off limits or they may simply alternate days of frugal eating when individuals limit themselves to foods that equal only about 500 calories in all with days of unrestricted eating or `` feasting days '' `` of course '' anton notes `` we recommend healthy food during the feasting times '' the teams review of existing studies revealed that all in all any type of intermittent fasting diets are associated with significant weight loss in all 10 clinical trials assessing the effects of alternateday fasting the results conclusively pointed to this strategys effectiveness when it came to shedding extra kilos and 3 out of the 4 studies focused on the restricted timing type of intermittent fasting had similar results '' so in my mind its not a question of whether it works for producing fat loss '' says anton whats more interesting and more important is what kind of tissue is lost through intermittent fasting additional potential health benefits most of the studies reviewed by anton and team revealed that while participants did lose body fat no significant amount of lean tissue which includes organ tissue muscular tissue and bone tissue was lost this is important since lean tissue allows our bodies to keep on functioning well and other types of dieting strategies anton notes lead to significant loss of both fat and lean tissue which may affect health in the long run studies into the effect of the switch from glucosedriven energy to ketonedriven energy in rodents and other animals suggests that intermittent fasting could also have other health benefits the scientists say the researchers say that it could help to prolong the lifespan improve the functioning of metabolic processes protect cognitive function enhance physical performance reduce harmful instances of inflammation and shield against cardiovascular diseases '' an important takeaway is that we all have the ability to switch our metabolism from glucose to ketone utilization and that switch has the potential to have profound health benefits for us in addition to the positive changes in body composition '' stephen anton still the authors warn against starting intermittent fasting without first asking for a doctors advice this dieting style may not be equally beneficial for everyone and in some cases it could do more harm than good he cautionsemerging evidence suggests that a `` potent '' drug could prevent the development of alzheimers disease but only if a person takes the medication long before symptoms of this condition make an appearance an existing drug may be able to stop alzheimers onset researchers say alzheimers disease is the most common form of dementia according to the centers for disease control and prevention cdc an estimated 57 million adults in the united states live with this condition unfortunately there is no cure for alzheimers and following disease onset symptoms tend to worsen progressively then the question `` can specialists prevent the disease in people deemed at increased risk '' arises the authors of a new study from the university of virginia in charlottesville suggest that one drug called memantine which is currently used to manage alzheimers symptoms may actually help prevent the disease this however might only happen if a person takes the drug before symptoms set in '' based on what weve learned so far it is my opinion that we will never be able to cure alzheimers disease by treating patients once they become symptomatic '' says prof george bloom of the university of virginia who oversaw the study '' the best hope for conquering this disease is to first recognize patients who are at risk and begin treating them prophylactically with new drugs and perhaps lifestyle adjustments that would reduce the rate at which the silent phase of the disease progresses '' he says adding `` ideally we would prevent it from starting in the first place '' the journal alzheimers dementia has now published the teams findings the cell cycle reentry process the researchers explain that alzheimers disease actually begins long before symptoms start to show perhaps even a decade or longer in advance one of the conditions characteristics is that once affected by the disease brain cells attempt to divide possibly in order to balance out the death of other neurons only to die anyway in any case the further division of fully formed brain cells is unusual and does not happen in a healthy brain the affected neurons attempt at division is called the `` cell cycle reentry process '' '' its been estimated that as much as 90 percent of neuron death that occurs in the alzheimers brain follows this cell cycle reentry process which is an abnormal attempt to divide '' explains prof bloom more potent alzheimers therapy is on its way recent advances in alzheimers research are speeding up the process of designing better therapies read now '' by the end of the course of the disease the patient will have lost about 30 percent of the neurons in the frontal lobes of the brain '' he estimates study coauthor erin kodis prof blooms former doctoral student formed her own hypothesis about what triggers this mechanism excess calcium she believes enters neurons through special receptors called nmda receptors on the cells surface this drives brain cells to start dividing following a series of laboratory experiments kodis confirmed that her hypothesis was correct this mechanism is set in motion before the formation of amyloid plaques which are characteristic of alzheimers disease in the brain eventually however molecules of an amino acid called beta amyloid stick together to form toxic amyloid plaques memantine may have potent properties kodis saw that when neurons encounter beta amyloid molecules in the early stages that precede plaque buildup nmda receptors open to receive the excess calcium that ultimately leads to their destruction but then the researcher made another discovery the drug memantine prevented cell cycle reentry by closing the nmda receptors on the surface of neurons '' the experiments suggest that memantine might have potent diseasemodifying properties if it could be administered to patients long before they have become symptomatic and diagnosed with alzheimers disease '' prof george bloom '' perhaps this could prevent the disease or slow its progression long enough that the average age of symptom onset could be significantly later if it happens at all '' prof bloom adds these findings are particularly promising memantine has few known side effects and those that have been reported are rare and do not have a major impact on an individuals wellbeing prof bloom believes that in the future a useful preventive approach might be to screen people for telling signs that they are exposed to alzheimers as early as possible specialists could then prescribe memantine to those at an increased risk of the disease he says people may have to take the drug throughout their lives to keep alzheimers at bay or at least in check '' i dont want to raise false hopes '' says prof bloom however he continues `` if this idea of using memantine as a prophylactic pans out it will be because we now understand that calcium is one of the agents that gets the disease started and we may be able to stop or slow the process if done very early '' currently prof bloom and colleagues are planning a clinical trial to test the preventive strategy that they outlined in the studyfor many cancers diagnosis is a long and challenging process a new blood test however could offer a muchneeded simpler and more effective diagnostic technique called cancerseek it has the potential to identify eight cancer types from one blood sample researchers have created a blood test that could detect eight cancer types in the new study researchers reveal how the blood test demonstrated high sensitivity and specificity for cancer detection in more than 1000 people with the disease the team from the johns hopkins university school of medicine in baltimore md recently published their results in the journal science worldwide cancer remains one of the leading causes of death it is estimated that by 2030 the number of cancer deaths will have risen from 8 million to 13 million early diagnosis is key to reducing cancerrelated deaths the earlier the disease is diagnosed the higher the chances of treatment success but sadly many cancers are not caught until the later stages and this is largely due to a lack of fast and effective diagnostic tools however the johns hopkins researchers believe that cancerseek could bring us closer to a quick simple way to detect cancer in its early stages test produced high sensitivity and specificity when cancerous tumors form they release small fragments of mutated dna and proteins into the bloodstream and these can act as markers for cancer the new blood test works by identifying the markers for 16 gene mutations and eight proteins that are associated with eight different cancer types these include breast lung and colorectal cancer as well as five cancers ovarian liver stomach pancreatic and esophageal for which there are currently no routine screening tests for people at average risk '' a novelty of our classification method is that it combines the probability of observing various dna mutations together with the levels of several proteins in order to make the final call '' explains study coauthor cristian tomasetti phd an associate professor of oncology and biostatistics at johns hopkins university how gum disease could lead to cancer researchers shed light on how gum disease can fuel cancer read now for their study the researchers tested cancerseek on 1005 individuals who had been diagnosed with nonmetastatic forms of one of the eight cancers they found that the test was able to identify 70 percent of the cancers with sensitivity ranging from 33 percent for breast cancer to 98 percent for ovarian cancer sensitivity ranged from 69 percent to 98 percent for the five cancers that currently have no routine screening tests the researchers report in terms of specificity the test yielded an overall result of more than 99 percent on testing cancerseek on 812 healthy adults it only produced seven falsepositive results as study coauthor kenneth kinzler phd codirector of the ludwig center for cancer genetics and therapeutics at johns hopkins notes `` very high specificity was essential because falsepositive results can subject patients to unnecessary invasive followup tests and procedures to confirm the presence of cancer '' what is more the researchers found that their test was able to pinpoint the location of tumors for 83 percent of patients test could substantially impact patients the researchers note that larger studies will now be needed to further determine the efficacy of cancerseek as a routine screening test for cancer and such studies are in the pipeline however the team believes that the results of its current research are encouraging '' this has the potential to substantially impact patients earlier detection provides many ways to improve outcomes for patients '' says study coauthor dr anne marie lennon phd who is an associate professor of medicine surgery and radiology at johns hopkins '' optimally cancers would be detected early enough that they could be cured by surgery alone but even cancers that are not curable by surgery alone will respond better to systemic therapies when there is less advanced disease '' she adds the team hopes that cancerseek will one day offer a simple noninvasive and fast strategy for diagnosing cancer in its early stages '' this test represents the next step in changing the focus of cancer research from late stage disease to early disease which i believe will be critical to reducing cancer deaths in the longterm '' study coauthor dr bert vogelstein johns hopkins university school of medicinethey are usually marketed as a safe alternative to conventional cigarettes but a new study suggests that ecigarettes may still pose serious harm to health researchers suggest that ecigarettes may increase the risk of cancer and heart disease researchers at the new york university school of medicine in new york city found that mice exposed to electronic cigaratte ecigarette vapor experienced dna damage in the lungs bladder and heart which could increase the risk of cancer and heart disease such damage was also found in cultured human lung and bladder cells that had been exposed to ecigarette vapor for the equivalent of 10 years study coauthor moonshong tang of the department of environmental medicine at the new york university school of medicine and his colleagues recently reported their findings in the proceedings of the national academy of sciences ecigarettes also known as ecigs have soared in popularity in recent years particularly among teenagers and young adults according to the centers for disease control and prevention cdc more than 2 million middle and high school students in the united states report having used ecigarettes in the past 30 days ecigarettes are not approved by the food and drug administration fda as a quitsmoking aid after the us preventive services task force concluded that there is `` insufficient evidence to recommend for or against their use for smoking cessation '' however research has found that more than 80 percent of smokers believe that ecigarettes could help them to quit while more than 97 percent believe that the batterypowered devices can help to reduce the use of conventional tobacco the debate over ecigarette safety when it comes to our health the cdc believe that ecigarettes are not as harmful as conventional ones still because ecigarettes are relatively new to the market precisely how harmful they are remains unclear that said we are learning more and more about the potential dangers of ecigarette use or `` vaping '' the pros and cons of ecigarettes revealed a new report details the potential benefits and risks of ecigarette use read now in 2017 medical news today reported on a study that linked the flavorings in ecigarette liquid to impaired heart muscle function a more recent report claims that there is `` substantial evidence '' that ecigarette use increases heart rate and that some chemicals in the vapor can harm dna the study by tang and team provides further evidence of the harms of ecigarettes after finding that exposure to ecigarette vapor can damage dna in a way that could cause cancer and heart disease ecigarette vapor caused dna damage the researchers came to their findings by exposing 10 male mice to ecigarette vapor containing 10 milligrams of nicotine which is comparable with what humans inhale for 3 hours per day 5 days per week for 12 weeks when compared with a control group of mice that inhaled filtered air they found that the mice exposed to ecigarette vapor showed dna damage in their heart lungs and bladder what is more the scientists found that exposure to ecigarette vapor halted dna repair processes in the lung tissue of mice they found the same outcomes when testing longterm exposure to ecigarette vapor on human lung and bladder cells in conclusion to their findings tang and colleagues write '' based on these results we propose that ecs ecigarette smoke is carcinogenic and that ecig smokers have a higher risk than nonsmokers to develop lung and bladder cancer and heart diseases '' critics of the research however claim that this study does not prove that ecigarettes are harmful to health talking to the guardian peter hajek the director of the tobacco dependence research unit at queen mary university of london in the united kingdom says that the `` study shows nothing at all about the dangers of vaping '' he continues saying `` it doesnt show that vaping causes cancer this is one in a long line of false alarms which may be putting people off the switch from smoking to vaping which would undoubtedly be of great benefit to them '' it seems that the jury is out on whether or not vaping can cause cancer and heart disease but one thing is clear more studies are needed to find outbreaking research concludes that the use of two existing drugs could successfully treat certain lung cancers the study delves deep into the molecular survival kit of lung tumors understanding how lung tumors survive and grow leads to an innovative new treatment lung cancer is now the leading cause of cancer death in the united states responsible for almost 160000 deaths each year many are driven by the kras oncogene kras is an essential gene but in its mutant form it is an important step in the generation of many types of cancer for over 30 years the kras oncogene has been a focus of research finding a way to remove its teeth would be pivotal in the treatment of a range of cancers as part of this effort rather than targeting the gene directly some scientists have focused on pathways that are related to the errant gene one pathway of interest centers on insulin and insulinlike growth factor1 igf1 this pathway helps to regulate the uptake of nutrients into the cell providing it with the energy and raw ingredients it needs to grow if the tumor cells fuel supply could be severed its onward march might be halted however it is not clear whether kras oncogenes are reliant on this particular pathway and in clinical trials results have not been encouraging in fact one study in mice found that lung tumors actually became more aggressive after the pathway was suppressed attacking krasrelated pathways undeterred a team from the boston childrens hospital in massachusetts used a fresh approach in the mouse study mentioned above the insulinigf1 signaling pathway was only partially closed off in the latest study though a genetic technique was used that shut it down entirely to do this the scientists crossed two strains of genetically modified mice the first is a wellused model for krasdriven lung cancer and the other is a mouse used to study diabetes that lacks insulinigf1 signaling in the diabetes mouse model the insulinigf1 pathway is unshackled by the deletion of two genes irs1 and irs2 these encode `` adaptor '' proteins which are essential for the smooth running of the insulinigf1 pathway '' our study uses a robust way to block insulinigf1 signaling and addresses a longstanding question in krasmutant lung cancer when you use genetics results can be more conclusive '' senior study author nada kalaany phd an assistant professor at harvard medical school boston ma using their new model the scientists demonstrated that by suppressing the two adaptor proteins insulinigf1 signaling is blocked and lung tumors are significantly suppressed '' almost all animals in this lung cancer model typically die within 15 weeks of kras activation '' says kalaany `` but the ones that lost both irs1 and irs2 were completely fine we saw almost no tumors at 10 to 15 weeks '' this finding is important because drugs that block insulinigf1 signaling are already in use and freely available the results are published this week in the proceedings of the national academy of sciences while the preliminary findings are hopeful the researchers knew that there was more work to be done cancer is a complex evermorphing disease with a terrifying knack for circumventing medical interventions outfoxing lung cancer to observe whether the cancer cells were able to navigate around this new roadblock the team let the animals live longer to see what happened next as kalaany explains `` sure enough at around 16 weeks we started seeing some tumors so then we asked how were these tumor cells able to overcome loss of irs1 and irs2 '' how lung cancer cells disguise themselves to evade chemo by adopting the traits of cells from other major organs lung cancer cells can escape chemotherapy read now the answer was found in the levels of essential cellular building blocks amino acids tumor cells lacking the adaptor proteins failed to move amino acids into their cells despite a plentiful supply outside of the cell '' growth factors like igf1 tell cells that nutrients are around '' says kalaany `` so when you suppress their signaling the tumor cells dont take up the amino acids and think they are starved '' '' but we found that the tumor cells can compensate for this and break down their own proteins to generate amino acids '' so the krasdriven tumors threw out a curve ball they had once again figured out a workaround by breaking themselves down in a process known as autophagy they can generate the raw material they need to thrive the researchers however were one step ahead heading cancer off at the pass drugs that inhibit protein breakdown are already available these include chloroquine which is currently involved in a number of cancer drug trials and bortezomib which blocks proteasomes proteindigesting structures and is already used to treat myeloma when the two prongs of the attack were combined the results were more than encouraging they found that tumor cells lacking irs1 and irs2 did not grow well and when the inhibitors were added growth stopped almost completely additional studies will now be needed to understand how these two drug types might interact in a patient however this is a considerable breakthrough and the researchers are excited to take it to the next phase '' our work tries to identify metabolic dependencies and vulnerabilities in tumors '' says kalaany `` if we identify collaborators we would love to have a clinical trial in nonsmallcell lung cancer combining igf1 inhibitors with autophagy inhibitors or proteasome inhibitors '' by testing to breaking point every part of a tumor cells survival kit researchers will one day beat cancerhigh blood pressure or hypertension is a major risk factor for heart disease the leading cause of death in the united states but a new study has found that two classes of medication that are commonly used to lower blood pressure could present a death risk all on their own researchers have identified two blood pressure drugs that could raise mortality risk scientists at the intermountain medical center heart institute in salt lake city ut found that individuals with hypertension who used alpha blockers and alpha2 agonists to control their blood pressure showed an increase in blood pressure variability which could increase mortality risk lead study author dr brian clements and team have recently presented their findings at the 2018 american college of cardiology acc scientific sessions held in orlando fl blood pressure is the force of blood that pushes against the wall of the arteries and in november last year the american heart association aha and the acc set new guidelines now a person is considered to have hypertension if their systolic blood pressure the top number is 130 millimeters of mercury mmhg or higher and their diastolic blood pressure the bottom number is 80 mmhg or higher systolic blood pressure is the force of blood against the artery walls when the heart is beating while diastolic blood pressure is the force of blood when the heart is at rest or between heartbeats the updated guidelines mean that almost half of adults in the united states have high blood pressure which puts them at greater risk of heart attack stroke and heart disease among other health problems of course when it comes to treating hypertension the goal is to lower blood pressure this may be achieved through lifestyle changes such as adopting a healthful diet and increasing physical activity medication or both previous research however has discovered that consistency is key for blood pressure levels a study published in the bmj in 2016 for example associated higher variability of systolic blood pressure with a 15 percent increase in allcause mortality according to the new study from dr clements and colleagues certain types of medication that are used to lower blood pressure may be contributing to this mortality risk two medications should be avoided for their study the researchers analyzed the data of over 10500 adults with high blood pressure the participants had their blood pressure measured at least seven times between january 2007 and december 2011 and the type of blood pressure medication they were using was monitored common blood pressure drug raises skin cancer risk researchers reveal how a blood pressure medication may increase the risk of skin cancer read now the team used these data to assess whether certain classes of blood pressure medication were associated with variability in blood pressure levels the study revealed two classes of blood pressure medication that were linked to higher blood pressure variability in subjects alpha blockers and alpha2 agonists alpha blockers which include doxazosin mesylate and prazosin hydrochloride work by dilating the blood vessels alpha2 agonists such as methyldopa work by targeting sympathetic nervous system activity thereby reducing blood vessel constriction based on the study results dr clements and colleagues say that these two medications should not be used to treat hypertension '' patients should know what their blood pressure is '' he says `` and if its up and down all the time the patient should work with their physician to explore options for the best blood pressure medications that will reduce variances '' '' where possible the two types of medications that show an increase in variances should be avoided '' dr brian clements dr clements adds that ace inhibitors angiotensin receptor blockers calcium channel blockers and thiazide diuretics may be safer treatment options for people with hypertension `` people who are on other types of blood pressure medications have an increased risk of death '' he adds however blood pressure variability is not solely down to medication dr clements notes that the way in which blood pressure is measured can have a significant effect on readings '' because of the variables that affect blood pressure measurements '' says dr clements `` finding ways to more accurately measure blood pressure can better identify effective treatments for patients who have hypertension '' for accurate blood pressure readings he recommends sitting or laying down for 15 minutes before measurements are taken avoiding stressful situations and using a wellfitting blood pressure cuff may also helpa new study reveals that individuals with higher levels of belly fat and larger waistlines are more likely to have lower vitamin d levels where fat is stored on the body may impact vitamin d levels currently in medical circles vitamin d is the talk of the town produced in our skin on contact with sunlight it plays a myriad of roles in the human body in the past few months medical news today have covered a wealth of research into the group of fatsoluble secosteroids more commonly known as vitamin d for instance recent studies have found that vitamin d might protect against heart failure diabetes and cancer and that vitamin d deficiency causes hair loss vitamin d deficiency has traditionally been linked to bone health but it may also have a role to play in respiratory tract infections and autoimmune disease among others with more than 40 percent of the population of the united states being vitamin d deficient this is a serious issue some authors have referred to it as `` an ignored epidemic '' estimating that over 1 billion people worldwide have inadequate levels vitamin d and belly fat exposed they discovered that in women both total and abdominal fat were associated with lower vitamin d levels but that abdominal fat had the greatest impact in men however lower vitamin d levels were significantly linked with fat in the liver and abdomen across both sexes more belly fat predicted lower levels of vitamin d rafiq explains `` the strong relationship between increasing amounts of abdominal fat and lower levels of vitamin d suggests that individuals with larger waistlines are at a greater risk of developing deficiency and should consider having their vitamin d levels checked '' her next step is to understand why this relationship exists does a deficiency in vitamin d cause fat to be stored in the abdominal region or does belly fat decrease levels of vitamin d it will take more work to tease apart cause and effect as rafiq explains `` due to the observational nature of this study we can not draw a conclusion on the direction or cause of the association between obesity and vitamin d levels '' '' however this strong association may point to a possible role for vitamin d in abdominal fat storage and function '' rachida rafiq the links between obesity and vitamin d deficiency are growing increasingly robust the next challenge is working out a way to effectively tackle this issuebaking soda has been used as a home remedy for generations due to its antacid properties yet its benefits run even deeper and new research may explain why it is an effective aid in the treatment of autoimmune diseases such as arthritis how can this kitchen staple change the bodys inflammatory response baking soda also called sodium bicarbonate is a kitchen staple commonly used as a raising agent for cakes that being said it has also made a name for itself as a home remedy for various conditions half a teaspoon of baking soda is often taken to ease heartburn or acid reflux for example and this substance is also used to whiten teeth in a new study whose findings are now published in the journal of immunology researchers from the medical college of georgia at augusta university reveal exactly how drinking a solution of baking soda could prime the immune system against inflammatory diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis paul oconnor a renal physiologist at augusta university and colleagues tested the effects that drinking a baking soda solution would have first on rats and then on humans their experiments tell a complex story about how this salt provides a signal to a special kind of cell called `` mesothelial cells '' telling them that the body is fine and not under attack rendering an aggressive immune system unnecessary thus harmful autoimmune responses are averted baking soda and mesothelial cells mesothelial cells line the internal organs as well as many different cavities in the body not only do they prevent organs and other internal tissue from sticking together they also serve other functions not all of which have been studied in detail in the new study oconnor and team tested the effect that a baking soda solution would have first on rats and then on healthy human participants and they noted that it influenced an intriguing mechanism can this biochemical switch off inflammation researchers may have found a way to `` switch off '' certain immune cells when necessary read now baking soda `` prompts '' the stomach to produce more gastric acid which allows it to digest food quicker and easier but in addition to this it also seems to tell the mesothelial cells that line the spleen to `` take it easy '' because there is no threat basically in oconnor words mesothelial cells learn that `` its most likely a hamburger not a bacterial infection '' so they in turn do not activate the spleens `` army '' of macrophages or white blood cells tasked with clearing up potentially harmful cellular detritus '' certainly drinking bicarbonate affects the spleen and we think its through the mesothelial cells '' oconnor explains mesothelial cells communicate with the organs they line using small projections called microvilli and the medium through which they send their message is the neurotransmitter acetylcholine from inflammatory to antiinflammatory so what actually happens the study authors note that those who drank the baking soda solution experienced a shift in the kinds of immune cells activated in the spleen in fact proinflammatory macrophages m1 dwindled in number while the levels of antiinflammatory cells m2 rose the same kinds of cells are also housed in the blood and kidneys and baking soda happens to be used in the treatment of chronic kidney disease this idea prompted the new studys authors to explore the mechanisms through which this substance might help to improve renal function '' we started thinking how does baking soda slow progression of kidney disease '' says oconnor at first the researchers analyzed the effects of the baking soda solution on a rat model of kidney disease and then again on healthy rats which acted as the control sample this is when the researchers noticed that the levels of m1 cells in the kidneys dropped while those of m2 cells increased both the rats with kidney disease and the healthy rats presented the same development and it was this shift that flagged up the notion that baking soda could influence the inflammatory response at cellular level when the researchers recruited healthy medical students and asked them to drink the baking soda solution it became apparent the antiinflammatory effect of this substance happened in the spleen as well as in the blood '' the shift from inflammatory to an antiinflammatory profile is happening everywhere we saw it in the kidneys we saw it in the spleen now we see it in the peripheral blood '' paul oconnor safe way to treat inflammatory disease one of the authors main revelations was the fact that it was the mesothelial cells that mediated the antiinflammatory signals an existing working theory had been that signals were transmitted to the relevant cells through the vagus nerve a long cranial nerve that communicates with the heart lungs and various organs in the abdomen but experiments revealed that this idea was incorrect when the scientists tried cutting off this nerve this did not affect the behavior of the mesothelial cells instead it became apparent that these cells had a more direct communication with the organs they lined than previously thought oconnor and his team became aware of this when they noted that moving the spleen affected mesothelial cells that lined it and the signals modulating the inflammatory response were lost '' we think the cholinergic acetylcholine signals that we know mediate this antiinflammatory response arent coming directly from the vagal nerve innervating the spleen but from the mesothelial cells that form these connections to the spleen '' explains oconnor the results begin to provide an answer as to why baking soda can help with autoimmune diseases including arthritis and further research into these mechanisms could help to optimize the results obtained through this common compound '' its potentially a really safe way to treat inflammatory disease '' oconnor concludesanxiety disorders are common across the united states thought to affect around 40 million adults each year however as if these feelings of worry and fear arent enough to contend with a new study suggests that older people who have worsening anxiety symptoms may be more likely to develop alzheimers disease researchers have linked increasing anxiety symptoms in older age to higher levels of a protein linked to alzheimers researchers found that increasing symptoms of anxiety were linked to higher levels of betaamyloid which is a protein associated with alzheimers disease in the brains of older people with normal cognitive functioning first study author dr nancy donovan who is a geriatric psychiatrist at brigham and womens hospital in boston ma and team say that the results suggest that a rise in the sypmtoms of anxiety could be an early sign of alzheimers the findings were recently published in the american journal of psychiatry alzheimers disease is a form of dementia characterized by problems with memory and thinking as well as changes in behavior it is estimated that around 55 million people in the us are living with alzheimers of whom around 54 million are over the age of 65 the precise causes of alzheimers disease remain unclear but scientists believe that betaamyloid plays a key role this is a protein that can form `` plaques '' which have been found to block nerve cell communication in the brains of people with alzheimers these plaques are considered to be a hallmark of the disease and research has suggested that an increase in betaamyloid levels can occur up to 10 years before the onset of alzheimers symptoms according to the new study anxiety could play a significant role in increased betaamyloid levels among older adults targeting anxiety may slow alzheimers previous studies have suggested that depression and anxiety might be indicators of alzheimers since symptoms of these mental health conditions often occur in the early stages of the disease for their study dr donovan and colleagues sought to determine whether or not betaamyloid might play a role in this association alzheimers tripleaction diabetes drug shows promise as treatment researchers reveal how a diabetes drug could help to treat alzheimers read now the research included 270 adults between age 62 and 90 with normal cognitive functioning all of whom underwent positron emission tomography at study baseline and annually during 5 years of followup in order to determine levels of betaamyloid in their brains symptoms of anxiety and depression among the adults were assessed using the 30item geriatric depression scale it was found that adults who showed an increase in anxiety symptoms over 5 years of followup also had higher levels of betaamyloid in their brains the researchers say that this indicates that worsening anxiety might be an early sign of alzheimers disease '' if further research substantiates anxiety as an early indicator it would be important for not only identifying people early on with the disease but also treating it and potentially slowing or preventing the disease process early on '' dr nancy donovan the scientists point out that followup studies are required to determine whether older adults who experience an increase in anxiety symptoms actually go on to develop alzheimersnew results could change the face of alzheimers treatment the herpes simplex virus is found to play a vital role in the condition and antiherpetic medication is shown to have a dramatic effect on dementia risk alzheimers disease may soon be treated with antiviral medication last month medical news today reported on a study that found `` strong evidence '' that viruses are involved in alzheimers disease the postmortem analyses of brain tissue found that people who lived with this dementia type also had more herpesviruses 6 and 7 than people without alzheimers now a scientific commentary suggests that the study that mnt covered is not the only one to pinpoint a link between herpes and dementia in fact three more studies have strengthened this link and the commentary recently published in the journal of alzheimers disease – takes a look at all three ruth itzhaki who is a professor of neuroscience and experimental psychology at the university of manchester in the united kingdom alongside richard lathe who is a professor in the division of infection and pathway medicine at the university of edinburgh also in the uk authored the commentary remarkable magnitude of antiviral effect the studies referenced in the commentary are two articles tsai et al 2017 and chen et al 2018 that suggest that acute herpes zoster infection puts people at a higher risk of dementia and one article that shows that aggressive treatment with antiherpetic medication drastically lowers dementia risk the latter study deemed `` most important '' by profs itzhaki and lathe examined 8362 people aged 50 and above who received a diagnosis of herpes simplex virus hsv infection as well as a control group of 25086 agematched healthy people breakthrough researchers fix alzheimers gene by correcting the faulty apoe4 gene researchers were able to erase its damaging effects on the brain read now the two groups were followed for almost a decade between 2001 and 2010 in the herpes group the risk of dementia was over 25 times higher than in the control group significantly the study also revealed that aggressive antiviral treatment reduced the relative risk of dementia by 10 times prof lathe comments on these new findings saying `` not only is the magnitude of the antiviral effect remarkable but also the fact that despite the relatively brief duration and the timing of treatment in most patients severely affected by hsv1 it appeared to prevent the longterm damage in the brain that results in alzheimers '' '' this article and two others provide the first population evidence for a causal link between herpes virus infection and alzheimers disease a hugely important finding '' prof ruth itzhaki '' i believe we are the first to realize the implications of these striking data on this devastating condition which principally affects the elderly '' prof itzhaki adds '' but '' she says `` we believe that these safe and easily available antivirals may have a strong part to play in combating the disease in these patients '' she also suggests that in the future it may be possible to prevent the disease `` by vaccination against the virus in infancy '' '' successful treatment by a specific drug or successful vaccination against the putative microbe are the only ways to prove that a microbe is the cause of a noninfectious human disease '' says prof itzhakiwith marijuana legalization on the rise an increasing number of studies are exploring the drugs potential harms and benefits however a new study suggests that when it comes to brain health alcohol is more damaging researchers say that alcohol causes more damage to the brain than marijuana does scientists at the university of colorado boulder conducted a review of existing imaging data that looked at the effects of alcohol and marijuana or cannabis on the brain their findings linked alcohol consumption with longterm changes to the structure of white matter and gray matter in the brain the use of marijuana however seemed to have no significant longterm effects on brain structure study leader rachel thayer of the department of psychology and neuroscience at the university of colorado boulder and colleagues recently reported their results in the journal addiction it is estimated that around 222 million people in the united states have used marijuana in the past month making it `` the most commonly used illicit drug '' in the country across the us however it is increasingly becoming legalized for both medicinal and recreational purposes as a result of this changing legislation researchers have been trying to find out more about how marijuana may benefit health as well as the damage that it could cause last year for example medical news today reported on a study linking marijuana use to a greater risk of psychosis in teenagers while another study claimed that the drug is `` worse than cigarettes '' for cardiovascular health on the other side of the coin researchers have found that cannabinoids which are the active compounds in marijuana could help to prevent migraine and a more recent study linked marijuana use to an increased sex drive marijuana vs alcohol which is worse for this latest study thayer and colleagues sought to learn more about how marijuana use affects the brain study coauthor kent hutchison also of the department of psychology and neuroscience notes that to date studies that have investigated this association have produced mixed results '' when you look at these studies going back years '' he explains `` you see that one study will report that marijuana use is related to a reduction in the volume of the hippocampus the next study then comes around and they say that marijuana use is related to changes in the cerebellum `` teen marijuana use may lead to bipolar symptoms later on researchers have linked marijuana use in adolescence to a greater risk of bipolar symptoms read now '' the point is that theres no consistency across all of these studies in terms of the actual brain structures '' with the aim of closing the gap on this inconsistency the researchers conducted a new analysis on existing brain imaging data they looked at how marijuana use affects white matter and gray matter in the brain and how its effects compare with another `` drug '' that we have become so accustomed to alcohol gray matter is the tissue on the brains surface that primarily consists of nerve cell bodies white matter is the deeper brain tissue that contains myelinated nerve fibers which are branches protruding from nerve cells that transmit electrical impulses to other cells and tissues the team notes that any reduction in the size of white or gray matter or a loss in their integrity can lead to impairments in brain functioning '' with alcohol weve known its bad for the brain for decades '' notes hutchison `` but for cannabis we know so little '' marijuana use had no impact the study included the brain images of 853 adults who were aged between 18 and 55 years and 439 teenagers between the ages of 14 and 18 all participants varied in their use of alcohol and marijuana the researchers found that alcohol use particularly in adults who had been drinking for many years was associated with a reduction in gray matter volume as well as a reduction in the integrity of white matter marijuana use however appeared to have no impact on the structure of gray or white matter in either teenagers or adults based on these findings the researchers believe that drinking alcohol is likely to be much more harmful to brain health than using marijuana '' while marijuana may also have some negative consequences it definitely is nowhere near the negative consequences of alcohol '' kent hutchison when it comes to the possible benefits of marijuana use however thayer and her team note that the jury is still out and further research is needed to reach some conclusionsa form of intermittent fasting known as the 168 diet helps obese individuals to lose weight and lower their blood pressure according to a new study timerestricted eating may be the key to weight loss more and more people now turn to intermittent fasting as a fast and effective way to lose weight there are different form of this diet depending on the time intervals of `` fasting '' and `` feasting '' the socalled 52 diet for instance consists of eating normally for 5 days every week and fasting for 2 days in the fasting days the dieter restricts their calorie intake to 500 or 600 per day in daily fasting or the 168 diet people eat whatever they like for 8 hours and fast for the remaining 16 a new study evaluates the benefits of this 168 pattern for obese individuals and finds that not only does the diet work but also that it helps to lower blood pressure as many as 933 million adults have obesity in the united states according to the latest data from the centers for disease control and prevention cdc thats almost 40 percent of the countrys entire population this research was led by corresponding author krista varady an associate professor of kinesiology and nutrition at the university of illinois at chicago and the findings were published in the journal nutrition and healthy aging losing weight without counting calories varady and colleagues recruited 23 obese study participants who were aged 45 years on average with an average body mass index bmi of 35 between 10 am and 6 pm the participants could eat whatever and however much they liked but they were only allowed to drink water and caloriefree drinks for the remaining 16 hours intermittent fasting may have profound health benefits some researchers say that this type of diet can also slow down aging and stave off disease read now all the study participants were followed for a period of 12 weeks and their dieting outcomes were compared with those of a previous weight loss trial of another type of intermittent fasting called `` alternate day fasting '' in alternate day fasting they can eat whatever they like for one day and fast for the following day on average when compared with the control trial those on the 168 diet consumed 350 fewer calories lost 3 percent of their weight and had lower blood pressure more specifically the systolic blood pressure of those who fasted daily dropped by an average of 7 millimeters of mercury however insulin resistance cholesterol and fat mass remained the same between the two compared groups as varady and her colleagues conclude `` these preliminary data offer promise for the use of timerestricted feeding as a weight loss technique in obese adults but longerterm largescale randomized controlled trials are required '' the studys corresponding author also comments on the significance of the findings saying `` the results we saw in this study are similar to the results weve seen in other studies on alternate day fasting '' '' but '' she adds `` one of the benefits of the 168 diet may be that it is easier for people to maintain we observed that fewer participants dropped out of this study when compared to studies on other fasting diets '' '' the takehome message from this study is that there are options for weight loss that do not include calorie counting or eliminating certain foods '' krista varady '' the 168 diet is another tool for weight loss that we now have preliminary scientific evidence to support '' varady concludes `` when it comes to weight loss people need to find what works for them because even small amounts of success can lead to improvements in metabolic health ''fish oil is hailed for its plentiful health benefits but new research suggests that the longterm consumption of fish oil or sunflower oil may increase the risk of fatty liver disease later in life researchers say that lifelong intake of fish oil or sunflower oil could raise the risk of fatty liver disease in later life by studying rats researchers found that lifelong intake of sunflower oil or fish oil led to changes in the liver that make the organ vulnerable to nonalcoholic steatohepatitis nash nash is a more serious form of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease nafld study coauthor josé luis quiles a professor of physiology working at the university of granada in spain and colleagues recently reported their findings in the journal of nutritional biochemistry it is estimated that around 20 percent of people in the united states who have nafld also have nash and the condition becomes more common with age nash is characterized by a buildup of fat in the liver which is not caused by alcohol consumption inflammation and liver cell damage the liver damage that occurs in nash can increase the risk of liver cirrhosis and liver cancer some of the key risk factors for nash include overweight and obesity high blood pressure high cholesterol and type 2 diabetes which are factors heavily influenced by diet studying how dietary fats affect the liver building on the link between diet and nash the new study from prof quiles and his colleagues suggests that the type of oils we consume could play a role in our laterlife risk of the condition the researchers came to their findings by analyzing the effects of different dietary fats including sunflower oil fish oil and virgin olive oil on rat livers in detail the team looked at how lifelong intake of each of these oils impacted the structure of the rodents livers as well as their effects on gene expression liver fibrosis or scarring oxidative stress and the length of telomeres kiwi compound may prevent nonalcoholic fatty liver disease research suggests that nafld could be prevented with a compound found in kiwi read now oxidative stress is defined as an imbalance between free radicals which are molecules that can damage cells and the bodys ability to `` deoxidize '' these molecules and prevent their harmful effects telomeres are `` caps '' at the end of each strand of dna and they protect our chromosomes the shorter our telomeres the greater the damage to our cells research has shown that a reduction in telomere length plays a key role in cellular aging and agerelated disease telomeres that are too long however can increase the risk of cancer additionally the team looked at how the liver evolves with age as a result of the different dietary fats consumed olive oil best for a healthy liver the researchers not only found that liver fat accumulates with age but they also revealed that the type of fat that builds up on the liver is influenced by the type of fats that we eat as prof quiles points out `` this means that regardless of this accumulation some livers age in a healthier way than others and with a greater or lesser predisposition to certain diseases '' the study revealed that fish oil and sunflower oil negatively impacted the liver health of the rats lifelong sunflower oil intake was found to trigger liver fibrosis and it also altered the structure of the organ led to changes in gene expression and increased oxidation in liver cells rats that had a lifelong intake of fish oil demonstrated an increase in agerelated cell oxidation in their livers the team reports and they also experienced a decrease in electron transport chain activity in the mitochondria the `` powerhouses '' of the cell which impairs cell function fish oil also led to an increase in relative telomere length in the liver the researchers report olive oil however was found to cause the least damage to the liver taken together the team says these findings indicate that virgin olive oil might be the best dietary fat for laterlife liver health '' the alterations caused by the longterm consumption of sunflower and fish oils make the liver susceptible to nonalcoholic steatohepatitis a very serious disease that may act as a catalyst for other liver diseases such as cirrhosis and liver cancer we believe that this study will be very useful in preventing and treating diverse liver diseases '' prof josé luis quiles '' virgin olive oil is the healthiest option '' he adds `` which has already been proven in relation to diverse aspects of health '' these findings may come as a surprise fish oil is the most commonly used natural product in the us due to its frequently documented health benefits still this latest study certainly provides some food for thought when it comes to choosing which fats to include in the dietpopular belief has it and even some governmental authorities on nutrition agree that we should avoid fullfat dairy products due to their high content of saturated fats but a new study boldly challenges these claims fullfat dairy products may actually be good for cardiovascular health wholefat dairy does not raise cardiovascular risk conversely some fats present in certain dairy products might even keep stroke and heart disease at bay this is the main takeaway of a recent study led by dr dariush mozaffarian from the friedman school of nutrition science and policy at tufts university in boston ma with their findings dr mozaffarian and team challenge not only popular opinions but also the stance of governmental organizations such as the united states department of agriculture usda and the us department of health human services the two bodies advise people to avoid fullfat dairy due to its impact on cholesterol levels the saturated fats found in wholefat dairy products warn the usda raise levels of lowdensity lipoprotein ldl cholesterol also known as the `` bad '' kind of cholesterol in time high ldl cholesterol may lead to cardiovascular conditions such as atherosclerosis or coronary artery disease however the new study turns the idea that fullfat dairy is bad for you on its head the surprising findings were published in the american journal of clinical nutrition marcia otto who is an assistant professor in the department of epidemiology human genetics and environmental sciences at the university of texas health science center at houston is the first and corresponding author of the paper dairy fat may prevent heart disease stroke to study the effect of dairy on mortality risk and cardiovascular health dr mozaffarian and team examined over 2900 us seniors aged 65 and above the researchers measured the participants blood plasma levels of three fatty acids contained by dairy products at the beginning of the study in 1992 6 years later and then 13 years later associations with `` total mortality causespecific mortality and cardiovascular disease cvd risk '' were examined these four foods are proven to lower your cholesterol the `` portfolio diet '' has been proved to keep the heart healthy by several studies read now during the 22year followup period 2428 of the participants died of these deaths 833 were due to heart disease however none of the three fatty acids examined correlated with the risk of total mortality in fact high circulating levels of heptadecanoic fatty acid were associated with a lower risk of death from heart disease also adults with higher levels of fatty acids overall were 42 percent less likely to die from stroke revealed the analysis dietary guidelines should be revised according to the studys corresponding author the findings suggest that current dietary guidelines need to be amended the 2015–2020 dietary guidelines for americans issued by the office of disease prevention and health promotion recommend the consumption of `` fatfree and lowfat 1 percent dairy including milk yogurt cheese or fortified soy beverages commonly known as soymilk '' however otto disagrees `` consistent with previous findings '' she says `` our results highlight the need to revisit current dietary guidance on whole fat dairy foods which are rich sources of nutrients such as calcium and potassium '' '' these are essential for health not only during childhood but throughout life particularly also in later years when undernourishment and conditions like osteoporosis are more common '' adds the researcher '' dairy fat contrary to popular belief does not increase the risk of heart disease or overall mortality in older adults in addition the results suggest that one fatty acid present in dairy may lower risk of death from cardiovascular disease particularly from stroke '' marcia otto she adds `` consumers have been exposed to so much different and conflicting information about diet particularly in relation to fats '' and she highlights the fact that `` a growing body of evidence '' suggests that dairy fat is actually good for you '' its important to have robust studies so people can make more balanced and informed choices based on scientific fact rather than hearsay '' otto concludesa new study looking at blood stem cells uncovered fresh details surrounding the mechanisms by which alcohol raises the risk of developing cancer a new study unearths the details of cancers relationship with alcohol alcohol is known to raise the risk of no fewer than seven types of cancer these are mouth upper throat pharynx voice box laryngeal esophageal breast liver and bowel cancer though the links are established exactly how alcohol works to induce malignancy is not as wellunderstood several mechanisms are thought to be at work most previous studies have only examined cells in the laboratory looking at changes in them after exposure to alcohol ethanol recently researchers from mrc laboratory of molecular biology in cambridge united kingdom set out to gain a clearer picture of the alcoholcancer relationship using whole animals their study which was funded by cancer research uk is published this week in the journal nature acetaldehyde and blood stem cells the team fed diluted ethanol to mice and then used chromosome analysis and dna sequencing to measure any damage caused by acetaldehyde a chemical produced when alcohol is processed they focused their attention on a specific cell type blood stem cells blood stem cells found in blood and bone marrow are immature blood cells that can develop into any type of blood cell including white blood cells platelets and red blood cells it is important to understand how alcohol damages these cells as faulty stem cells are known to cause cancer as alcohol is broken down in the gut bacteria convert it into large quantities of acetaldehyde a chemical that has previously been shown to cause cancer in animals even light drinkers at risk of cancer a recent statement from the american society of clinical oncology outlines the dangers of alcohol read now following the analysis the researchers found that acetaldehyde could in fact damage and break dna within blood stem cells chromosomes became rearranged and the dna sequence was permanently changed in stem cells lead study author prof ketan patel says `` some cancers develop due to dna damage in stem cells while some damage occurs by chance our findings suggest that drinking alcohol can increase the risk of this damage '' selfdefense mechanisms alongside new insights into the damage that ethanol causes to stem cells the scientists uncovered new information about the protective mechanisms employed by our bodies in response to alcohol enzymes called aldehyde dehydrogenases aldhs form the first line of defense against alcoholrelated damage aldhs break alcohol down into acetate `` which our cells can use as a source of energy '' millions of people many east asians for instance have low levels of aldh or faulty copies of the enzymes this means that toxic acetaldehyde builds up in the body these individuals will experience telltale flushed cheeks and potentially feel ill when the researchers investigated mice without aldh they found that alcohol caused four times as much damage to dna when compared with mice that could produce aldh beyond aldh the body has a range of other secondary mechanisms that can repair various types of dna damage but these mechanisms do not always work some people have mutations that render them ineffective '' our study highlights that not being able to process alcohol effectively can lead to an even higher risk of alcoholrelated dna damage and therefore certain cancers '' prof ketan patel '' but '' he continues `` its important to remember that alcohol clearance and dna repair systems are not perfect and alcohol can still cause cancer in different ways even in people whose defense mechanisms are intact '' alcohol is known to give rise to cancer and studies such as this help us to understand why and will eventually help to prevent or slow alcoholrelated cancers as prof linda bauld from cancer research uk says `` this thoughtprovoking research highlights the damage alcohol can do to our cells costing some people more than just a hangover ''it was previously believed that fructose which is the sugar found in fruit and fruit juice is processed by the liver however a new study suggests that fructose is mainly processed in the small intestine researchers reveal that fructose is primarily processed in the small intestine not the liver the study which is published in the journal cell metabolism reveals that processed highsugar food and drink only spills over into the liver for processing when the small intestine becomes overwhelmed the recent findings add to the body of scientific knowledge on the effects of too much fructose on the body we know from previous research that excessive consumption of sugar is harmful to the liver and that chronic overconsumption causes obesity increases resistance to insulin and creates conditions for the onset of diabetes last year medical news today reported on a study that found that fructosecontaining products such as sweetened drinks can increase the risk of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis a form of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease `` which can lead to cirrhosis or liver cancer '' study observed fructose digestion in mice the researchers from princeton university in new jersey used mice to study how fructose travels through the digestive system their findings suggest that there is a physiological difference in how the body processes different amounts of sugar rather than the liver processing all the sugar in the body the team observed that more than 90 percent of fructose was processed in the small intestines of the mice in the study the team found that fructose not absorbed into the small intestine is passed through to the colon where it comes into contact with the microbiome which is the microbiotic flora that inhabits the large intestine and colon fruit juices and smoothies have unacceptably high sugar content researchers reveal that a childs entire daily sugar allowance could be in one serving of fruit juice read now the researchers explain that the microbiome is not designed to process sugar so while a person could eat a large amount of carbohydrates without exposing their microbiome to any sugar this changes significantly when highsugar products such as soda and juice are consumed while the findings do not prove that fructose influences the microbiome the team believes that `` an effect is likely '' they suggest that this link should be further investigated in future studies as it may provide new insights into the adverse effects of high sugar intake eat sugar only after meals in the study the small intestine was found to clear fructose more efficiently after a meal the team theorizes that during periods of fasting such as in the morning or midafternoon individuals may be more vulnerable to fructose as the small intestine has reduced ability to process it during these times as study author joshua d rabinowitz of the lewissigler institute for integrative genomics at princeton university explains `` we can offer some reassurance at least from these animal studies that fructose from moderate amounts of fruits will not reach the liver '' '' we saw that feeding of the mice prior to the sugar exposure enhanced the small intestines ability to process fructose '' rabinowitz continues `` and that protected the liver and the microbiome from sugar exposure '' rabinowitz says that the results support `` the most oldfashioned advice in the world '' which is to `` limit sweets to moderate quantities after meals '' and avoid sugary drinks outside of meal timesit is known that being overweight or obese leads to poor health but it may be less known that abdominal fat is the most harmful type until now researchers were unsure of the mechanisms responsible for this but now they reveal how an enzyme produced by our liver raises the risk of diabetes inflammation in the fat around the belly is particularly harmful and new research reveals why when it comes to the harmful consequences of excess fat the way it is distributed across the body is key medical news today have recently reported on studies showing that abdominal fat is deeply tied to type 2 diabetes and heart disease we have also covered studies suggesting that women in particular could be at an increased cardiometabolic risk if they have a higher waisttohip ratio additional research has found that belly fat is particularly dangerous when inflamed older studies have shown that local inflammation in the adipose tissue leads to cardiometabolic abnormalities such as insulin resistance but the exact mechanism responsible for this connection between adipose tissue inflammation and cardiometabolic disorders has remained somewhat unclear for instance researchers have wondered whether the inflammation is `` a cause or a consequence of insulin resistance '' now researchers at columbia university irving medical center in new york city ny help to shed some muchneeded light on the issue they reveal that the liver contributes to this inflammation the team was led by dr ira tabas who is the richard j stock professor of medicine at columbia university vagelos college of physicians and surgeons and the findings were published in the journal nature the key role of dpp4 inhibitors in diabetes dr tabas and his colleagues used obese mice to test whether blocking an enzyme called dpp4 would lower the inflammation in their abdominal fat the researchers focused on dpp4 because humans who already have diabetes are prescribed dpp4 inhibitors to help them manage their symptoms dpp4 inhibitors work by preventing the enzyme from interacting with an insulinboosting hormone lowcalorie sweeteners may promote metabolic syndrome people with metabolic syndrome are much more likely to develop diabetes to prevent it new research suggests that these people should avoid artificial sweeteners read now in this study dpp4 did not lower abdominal inflammation in mice dr tabas explains these findings suggesting that they may be down to the difference between how dpp4 inhibitors work in the gut versus how they work in the liver '' dpp4 inhibitors lower blood sugar by inhibiting dpp4 in the gut but we have some evidence that dpp4 inhibitors in the gut also end up promoting inflammation in fat '' he states `` that cancels out the antiinflammatory effects the drugs may have when they reach inflammatory cells called macrophages in the fat '' '' from our studies '' adds dr tabas `` we know that dpp4 interacts with a molecule on these cells to increase inflammation if we could block that interaction we might be able stop the enzyme from causing inflammation and insulin resistance '' so the researchers targeted dpp4 in the liver cells instead of the gut this reduced adipose inflammation and lowered insulin resistance dpp4 inhibitors also decreased blood sugar toward human clinical trials as dr tabas reports `` inhibiting dpp4 specifically in liver cells attacks insulin resistance the core problem of type 2 diabetes at least in our preclinical models '' the researchers explain what the findings mean for future treatments of type 2 diabetes dr tabas says `` if we can develop ways to target liver dpp4 in people this may be a powerful new way to treat obesityinduced type 2 diabetes '' dr ahmed a hasan a medical officer and program director in the atherothrombosis coronary artery disease branch of the national heart lung and blood institute also comments on the findings he says `` this study reveals a potential new target for the treatment of type 2 diabetes and cardiometabolic disorders '' '' these findings may pave the way for a future clinical trial to test whether a new treatment approach based on this target could improve insulin resistance in diabetic patients more research is needed '' dr ahmed a hasanby finding a link to a condition that raises the risk of type 2 diabetes new research questions the health benefits of ketogenic diets is there a link between diabetes and the keto diet ketogenic diets are lowcarbohydrate highfat diets that have been shown to reduce weight they change metabolism so that energy comes from fat instead of sugar when researchers in switzlerland examined what happened to mice in the early stages of a ketogenic diet they found that the animals showed a poorer ability to regulate blood sugar compared with similar mice on a highfat highcarbohydrate diet in a paper on their work now published in the journal of physiology they note that `` even though keto dietfed animals appear healthy in the fasted state they exhibit decreased glucose tolerance to a greater extent than highfat dietfed animals '' the reason for this they found was that the livers of the keto dietfed mice were not responding as well to insulin this condition which is known as insulin resistance raises the risk of developing type 2 diabetes '' diabetes is one of the biggest health issues we face '' says study author christian wolfrum who is with the institute of food nutrition and health at eth zürich in switzerland insulin resistance insulin is a hormone that helps the body control levels of blood sugar or glucose if blood sugar stays above normal for long periods of time it becomes a condition called hyperglycemia that can lead to serious health problems this is the hallmark of diabetes in type 1 diabetes hyperglycemia develops because the pancreas does not make enough insulin in type 2 diabetes organs and tissues lose their ability to respond to insulin the pancreas tries to compensate by making more insulin but eventually this is not enough and leads to hyperglycemia normal blood sugar levels may not be so normal after all researchers have found that `` normal '' levels of blood glucose often mask spikes that are considerably higher than what is considered healthy read now there are a number of ways in which insulin helps control blood glucose levels one is by signaling to the liver to reduce glucose production and another is by helping muscles and tissues absorb glucose and convert it into energy insulin resistance is a `` complex metabolic disorder '' with no obvious single cause the liver becomes insulin resistant when it fails to reduce glucose production in response to insulin cells can also become insulin resistant when they need increasing amounts of the hormone to help them use glucose however the researchers found that the main reason for decreased glucose tolerance in the keto dietfed mice was due to insulin resistance in the liver `` rather than impaired glucose clearance and tissue glucose uptake '' despite extensive research into the causes of insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes they are not completely understood one thing that scientists do know is that fatlike substances called lipids are `` clearly associated with insulin resistance '' even here however many questions remain such as `` is the link due to circulating fats or to fat buildup in tissue '' ketogenic diets and ketosis by dramatically reducing intake of carbohydrates keto diets induce a metabolic state known as ketosis in this state cells that would normally get their energy from glucose switch to ketones the lack of carbohydrates makes the body break down fats into fatty acids and then into ketones keto diets are probably among the `` most studied '' approaches to weight loss of recent times a lot of research now backs the idea that keto diets have a sound `` physiological and biochemical basis '' and can significantly benefit cardiovascular health this is welcome news to many physicians for whom one of the biggest challenges that they face in their daily practices is treating obesity however while keto diets have a proven track record in tackling obesity some concerns remain many of these likely relate to a `` broad lack of knowledge about the physiological mechanisms involved '' mechanisms of insulin resistance not clear the new study helps plug some of this knowledge gap it suggests that insulin resistance in the liver can develop in the early stages of keto diets this now needs to be confirmed in humans also the underlying mechanisms that lead to insulin resistance are still unclear especially in relation to different diets this also needs to be explored further say the researchers another area that needs further research is the effect on the brain of the byproducts of fatty acid breakdown the researchers theory is that the fatty acid byproducts might have important `` signaling roles '' in the brain '' although ketogenic diets are known to be healthy our findings indicate that there may be an increased risk of insulin resistance with this type of diet that may lead to type 2 diabetes '' christian wolfrumby probing the effect that vitamin d3 has on the cells that make up the lining of blood vessels scientists at ohio university in athens oh have identified for the first time the role that the `` sunshine vitamin '' plays in preserving cardiovascular health the sunshine vitamin has been shown to preserve heart health in a paper published in the international journal of nanomedicine they describe how they used nanosensors and a cell model to identify the molecular mechanisms that vitamin d3 can trigger in the endothelium which is the thin layer of tissue that lines blood vessels it was previously believed that the endothelium served no other purpose than to act as an inert `` wrapper '' of the vascular system allowing both water and electrolytes to pass in and out of the bloodstream however advances over the past 30 years have revealed that the endothelium acts more like an organ that lines the whole of the circulatory system from the `` heart to the smallest capillaries '' and whose cells carry out many unique biological functions changes to the endothelium have been linked to several serious health problems including high blood pressure insulin resistance diabetes tumor growth virus infections and atherosclerosis which is a condition wherein fatty deposits can build up inside arteries and increase the risk of heart attack and stroke vitamin d3 has role beyond bone health the new study suggests that vitamin d3 a version of vitamin d that our bodies produce naturally when we expose our skin to the sun plays a key role in preserving and restoring the damage to the endothelium that occurs in these diseases some other natural sources of vitamin d3 include egg yolks and oily fish it is also obtainable in the form of supplements vitamin d3 is already wellknown for its role in bone health '' however '' explains senior author tadeusz malinski a professor in the department of chemistry and biochemistry `` in recent years in clinical settings people recognize that many patients who have a heart attack will have a deficiency of d3 '' '' it doesnt mean that the deficiency caused the heart attack '' he adds `` but it increased the risk of heart attack '' nanosensors probed effect of d3 on cells for their study prof malinski and colleagues developed a measuring system using nanosensors or tiny probes that are 1000 times smaller than the thickness of human hair and can operate at the level of atoms and molecules they used the nanosensors to track the impact of vitamin d3 on molecular mechanisms in human endothelial cells that had been treated to show the same type of damage that occurs from high blood pressure blood vessel discovery may prevent diabetes a new microscopy technique reveals that the transport of insulin across the endothelium differs to that suggested previously read now the findings suggest that vitamin d3 is a powerful trigger of nitric oxide which is a molecule that plays an important signaling role in the control of blood flow and the formation of blood clots in blood vessels the researchers also found that vitamin d3 significantly reduces oxidative stress in the vascular system they note that their study `` provides direct molecular insight to previously published observations that have suggested that vitamin d3 deficiencyinduced hypertension is associated with vascular oxidative stress '' the effects of vitamin d3 were similar in both caucasian and african american endothelial cells could d3 reverse cardiovascular damage the study authors note that while their findings came from tests performed on a cellular model of high blood pressure `` the implications of the influence of vitamin d3 on dysfunctional endothelium is much broader '' they suggest that vitamin d3 has the potential to significantly reverse the damage that high blood pressure diabetes atherosclerosis and other diseases inflict on the cardiovascular system '' there are not many '' prof malinski adds `` if any known systems which can be used to restore cardiovascular endothelial cells which are already damaged and vitamin d3 can do it '' '' this is a very inexpensive solution to repair the cardiovascular system we dont have to develop a new drug we already have it '' prof tadeusz malinskisome people find it harder to lose weight than others but why is this a new study has identified a molecule in fat cells that could be to blame researchers have uncovered one reason why some people may find it hard to lose weight researchers found that the fat cells of people who are obese show higher expression of a molecule called lysyl oxidase lox lox is associated with fibrosis or `` scarring '' of fat tissue which as previous research has shown can hamper weight loss efforts study coauthor dr katarina kos who works in the diabetes and obesity research group at the university of exeter medical school in the united kingdom and colleagues recently reported their findings in the journal metabolism it is thought that around 1 in 3 adults in the united states are obese which puts them at increased risk of type 2 diabetes stroke heart disease and some forms of cancer a lack of exercise and a poor diet are the primary causes of obesity so its no surprise that eating a healthful diet and increasing physical activity are the first strategies we try in an attempt to shed the pounds but these interventions can produce mixed results some individuals see the pounds fall off while others find it much more challenging the new study may have uncovered one explanation for the latter higher lox levels in people who are obese for their study dr kos and colleagues analyzed samples of abdominal fat tissue that had been taken from obese individuals before they underwent weight loss surgery compared with abdominal fat tissue samples of leaner subjects the analysis revealed that the fat tissue of obese people had greater expression of the lox molecule which is a cause of fat tissue fibrosis on further investigation the researchers found that the increase in lox expression was driven by an increase in oxygen deprivation and inflammation in fat cells which occurs when fat cells become larger weight loss breakthrough sunlight is key researchers suggest that lack of sunlight may be to blame for winter weight gain read now the scientists explain that when fat cells undergo this type of stress they lose their ability to store excess calories as a result these calories become stored as fat around important organs such as the liver and heart and this is associated with numerous health problems including heart disease and type 2 diabetes unfortunately studies have shown that fat tissue fibrosis can make it harder for individuals to lose weight `` but this does not mean that scarring makes weight loss impossible '' dr kos emphasizes '' adding some regular activity to a somewhat reduced energy intake for a longer period makes weight loss possible and helps the fat tissue not to become further overworked '' she continues `` we know that doing this improves our blood sugar and is key in the management of diabetes '' we need to look after our fat what is more the teams findings indicate that targeting the lox molecule could be one way to prevent fat cell fibrosis and possibly make weight loss easier but more studies are needed to confirm this theory dr kos notes that further research is also needed in order to identify other ways to prevent fat tissue fibrosis in the meantime she says that increasing our physical activity could help '' there is evidence that once fat tissue becomes scarred despite weight loss it may not recover fully '' she says `` we need to look after our fat tissue which can cease to cope if it is overworked when being forced to absorb more and more calories '' '' as a clinician '' dr kos concludes `` i would advise exercise or at least a walk after a meal which can make a great difference to our metabolic health ''its likely that we all enjoy a hot cup of tea or herbal infusion at least from time to time if not on a daily basis but what are the most important health benefits that some of these soothing teas can bring us read on to learn more about the top teas for our health some teas and herbal infusions have long been appreciated for their alleged health benefits but what does research have to say '' tea began as a medicine and grew into a beverage '' writes 19thcentury japanese scholar okakura kakuzo in his infamous publication the book of tea in it he speaks at length about the history of tea and the philosophy of the traditional japanese tea ceremony kakuzo was correct modern research about the history of teadrinking in the world confirms that this beverage was originally consumed less for pleasure or as a mindfulness aid calling for the drinker to take slow sips and be in the moment instead as shown by prof victor henry mair from the university of pennsylvania in philadelphia in the true history of tea early in its history the tea plant camellia sinensis became popular for its medicinal properties the tea plants main varieties camellia sinensis sinensis and camellia sinensis assamica are responsible for most of the tea brews that we are accustomed to black tea green tea white tea and oolong tea there are many other types of teas and infusions using various other plants such as aspalathus linearis which is better known as `` rooibos '' or `` redbush '' in this spotlight well give you an overview of the top five teas that can benefit your health 1 green tea a favorite with tea drinkers everywhere green tea has been praised for its medicinal properties for years some recent studies have now confirmed some of these benefits suggesting that green tea may protect various aspects of our health green tea can increase cognitive functioning to begin with this beverage has been found to enhance cognitive functioning with one study connecting it to better working memory the type of we use on a daytoday basis researchers from the university hospital of basel in switzerland found that healthy people who agreed to consume a soft drink containing 275 grams of green tea extract exhibited more intense activity in brain areas linked to working memory therefore participants who had ingested the green tea extract had better connectivity between the frontal and parietal lobes of the brain which are two regions involved in aspects of learning memory processes and decisionmaking the health benefits brought about by green tea have been linked with their content of polyphenols which are micronutrients with antioxidant properties as antioxidants these substances can protect against the action of free radicals which induce the type of cellular damage consistent with aging a 2017 study that was published in the journal of the american chemical society found that one such polyphenol found in green tea called epigallocatechin gallate may lower the risk of alzheimers disease by interacting with the `` building blocks '' that form betaamyloid plaques a buildup of these plaques in the brain is typical of this condition and impairs brain cell signaling epigallocatechin gallate this study suggests could stop betaamyloid from forming into plaques potentially helping to keep alzheimers at bay this same green tea polyphenol has also been said to slow down the growth of tumor cells of certain types of cancer such as pancreatic cancer research that was led by the los angeles biomedical research institute in california has shown that epigallocatechin gallate can disrupt the metabolism of pancreatic cancer cells thereby impairing their growth 2 jasmine tea what we refer to as `` jasmine tea '' is a type of beverage that usually has green tea at its base to which jasmine flowers are added for an enriched aroma jasmine tea is an important component of the diet of one of the longestliving populations in the world but the benefits of jasmine tea arent solely due to the antioxidant effects of the tea plant since jasmine blooms also bring their own medicinal properties to the mix in the book ikigai the japanese secret to a long and happy life authors héctor garcía and francesc miralles note that the inhabitants of a healthy longlived community in the okinawa prefecture of japan are avid drinkers of sanpincha a special blend of green tea and jasmine '' okinawans drink more sanpincha a mix of green tea and jasmine flowers than any other kind of tea '' they write suggesting that this blend may play a role in keeping the inhabitants of okinawa healthy and mentally agile well into old age this may be because like the tea plant jasmine flowers contain antioxidants which may protect cells from agerelated damage what are the best foods to fight aging read about the top five foods that will help you to stay young in body and mind read now jasmine itself has been linked with improved physical wellbeing and is said to reduce the impact of stress that is why some researchers have experimented with compounds derived from this plant in the search of better therapies for instance prof eliezer flescher from tel aviv university in israel noticed that methyl jasmonate which is a compound obtained from jasmonic acid found in the jasmine plant induces the death of cervical cancer cells and if you happen to enjoy drinking jasmine tea simply because you love the way it smells theres actually a good reason for that research that was published in the european journal of applied physiology explained that the smell of jasmine tea is soothing able to calm nerves and able to help regulate mood 3 rooibos tea another type of tea with antioxidant properties is rooibos or `` redbush tea '' which is prepared from the aspalathus linearis plant native to south africa rooibos tea may protect liver health research has suggested that the antioxidant effects of rooibos are similar to if not quite as strong as those of green tea a recent study on the rat model has suggested that the antioxidants in rooibos tea may protect the liver from oxidative stress helping to render this organ more resilient to induced damage the researchers who conducted the study noted that their findings suggest that rooibos tea or rooibosderived dietary supplements may offer a useful health boost '' results from this study suggest that the daily intake of unfermented rooibos herbal tea or a derived commercial rooibos supplement may benefit human health by providing the liver with an enhanced antioxidant capacity to reduce damage induced by toxicants '' moreover rooibos has also been cited as helpful in lowering blood pressure and relaxing tense muscles suggesting that the active ingredient in this instance might be one of the flavonoids pigments that it contains chrysoeriol unlike green or black tea rooibos does not contain any caffeine so it wont have the same stimulating effects this makes it safe to drink well into the evening 4 hibiscus tea those of you who enjoy the refreshing taste of a more sour brew may also be familiar with herbal infusions of hibiscus a plant whose flowers can be used not just to make invigorating beverages but also to give a subtle `` punch '' to salads or as an elegant garnish for sophisticated dishes hibiscus tea is an antioxidant and may bring cardiovascular benefits the most commonly used variety is hibiscus sabdariffa also known as the `` roselle '' for the tea or more correctly `` tisane '' herbal tea its calyces are typically used although other parts of the plant such as the leaves seeds and roots are safe for consumption studies have suggested that extracts from the hibiscus calyx and hibiscus leaves have antioxidant and antitumoral effects therefore they may protect against the aging action of free radicals at a cellular level as well as fight certain types of leukemia cells hibiscus tea has also been tied to cardiovascular benefits helping to regulate systolic and diastolic blood pressure that is blood pressure during and inbetween heart beats respectively though not so commonly used to brew tea hibiscus leaves have also been linked repeatedly to a wide array of health benefits thus the polyphenols in hibiscus leaves may help to induce tumor cell death in skin cancer according to a 2015 study another study from the same year also argued that hibiscus leaf extracts could inhibit the action of prostate cancer cells 5 lemon verbena tea another herbal tea whose medicinal properties are getting increasingly recognized is that made out of lemon verbena scientifically dubbed aloysia citrodora infusions with lemon verbena are said to help with weight management it is the citrusflavored cousin of a betterknown plant that has been used in herbal infusions for years verbena or vervain verbena officinalis infusions made with lemon verbena are great for those who like me prefer a subtler citrusy aroma in their hot drinks rather than the strong lemony flavor of commonly commercialized citrus tea blends the first time that i came upon this plant sold as a tisane herb was in a local organic shop that was selling it as `` weight loss tea '' in fact studies have shown that the polyphenols in this plant can decrease the formation of fatty acids marking its potential use in the treatment of obesityrelated health issues researchers have also suggested that lemon verbena extracts may help to lower inflammatory markers levels in the blood of some people with multiple sclerosis '' results demonstrate that supplementation with lemon verbena extracts may affect the cytokine inflammation markers profile depending on the clinical subtype '' the study authors conclude having a cup of your tea or tisane of choice may be a pleasant way to carve out some selfindulgence time and stimulate your bodily and mental wellbeing in a subtle way but always keep in mind that as the saying goes `` one swallow does not a summer make '' and the most potent health benefits are best reaped by leading a healthful wholesome lifestyle we picked linked items based on the quality of products and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you we partner with some of the companies that sell these products which means healthline uk and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a links aboveheart disease is still the number one killer in the united states in this spotlight we outline 16 foods that when consumed as part of a wellrounded diet might help to keep your heart healthy how can you improve your heart health with food there are many things you can do to help keep your heart healthy and diseasefree you can schedule an annual checkup exercise daily quit smoking or take steps to reduce the level of stress in your life all of these things can have a positive effect on heart health but one of the simplest lifestyle changes that will benefit your heart is watching what you eat nearly 6 million people are currently living with heart failure and around half of these will die within 5 years of being diagnosed the centers for disease control and prevention cdc warn that eating foods high in fat cholesterol or sodium can be very bad for the heart so when taking steps to minimize the risk of heart disease diet is a good place to start in this article we examine some of the best foods for ensuring that you keep a robust and healthy heart 1 asparagus asparagus is a natural source of folate which helps to prevent an amino acid called homocysteine from building up in the body high homocysteine levels have been linked with an increased risk of heartrelated conditions such as coronary artery disease and stroke 2 beans peas chickpeas and lentils beans peas chickpeas and lentils otherwise known as pulses or legumes can all significantly reduce levels of lowdensity lipoprotein ldl or `` bad cholesterol '' they are also packed with fiber protein and antioxidant polyphenols all of which have beneficial effects on the heart and general health 3 berries berries are also full of antioxidant polyphenols which help to reduce heart disease risk berries are a great source of fiber folate iron calcium vitamin a and vitamin c and they are low in fat 4 broccoli some studies suggest that regularly eating steamed broccoli can lower cholesterol levels and prevent heart disease 5 chia seeds and flaxseeds these seeds are a rich plantbased source of omega3 fatty acids such as alphalinolenic acid omega3s have many beneficial effects such as helping to lower levels of triglycerides ldl and total cholesterol they also reduce blood pressure and minimize the buildup of fatty plaques in the arteries omega3s decrease the risk of disorders that can lead to heart attack such as thrombosis and arrhythmias 6 dark chocolate dark chocolate is a rare example of a food that tastes amazing and is good for you in moderation dark chocolate delicious and hearthealthy scientists now believe that dark chocolate has protective benefits against atherosclerosis which is when plaque builds up inside the arteries increasing risk of heart attack and stroke dark chocolate seems to prevent two of the mechanisms implicated in atherosclerosis stiffness of the arteries and white blood cell adhesion which is when white blood cells stick to the walls of blood vessels what is more studies have found that increasing dark chocolates flavanol content which is the compound that makes it tasty and moreish does not diminish these protective benefits 7 coffee also in the `` almost too good to be true '' camp is coffee one recent study found that regularly drinking coffee was linked with a decreased risk of developing heart failure and stroke however it is important to bear in mind that this study which used machine learning to assess data from the framingham heart study can only observe an association between factors and can not conclusively identify cause and effect could coffee stop clogged arteries consuming more than three cups of coffee every day may lower the risk of atherosclerosis read now 8 fish high in omega3s fish is a strong source of hearthelping omega3 fatty acids and protein but it is low in saturated fat people who have heart disease or are at risk of developing it are often recommended to increase their intake of omega3s by eating fish this is because they lower the risk of abnormal heartbeats and slow the growth of plaque in the arteries according to the american heart association aha we should eat a 35ounce serving of fatty fish such as salmon mackerel herring lake trout sardines or albacore tuna at least twice per week 9 green tea a 2011 systematic review found that drinking green tea is associated with a small reduction in cholesterol which as we know is a main contributor to heart disease and stroke but the review could not pinpoint how much green tea someone would have to drink to receive any health benefits in 2014 another review studied the effects of drinking green tea on people with high blood pressure the report concluded that green tea was associated with a reduction in blood pressure but the authors were unable to determine if this modest reduction could help to prevent heart disease 10 nuts almonds hazelnuts peanuts pecans pistachios and walnuts are all hearthealthy nut options these nuts are full of protein fiber minerals vitamins and antioxidants like fish and flaxseeds walnuts are also ripe with omega3 fatty acids making them a hearthealthy snack to have on the go 11 liver of all the organ meats liver is the most nutrientdense in particular liver is bulging with folic acid iron chromium copper and zinc which increase the bloods hemoglobin level and help to keep our heart healthy 12 oatmeal because oatmeal is rich in soluble fiber it may help to reduce the risk of heart disease a 2008 review of the evidence concluded that oatbased products significantly reduce ldl and total cholesterol without any adverse effects 13 red wine sort of many studies have noted the potential health benefits of the antioxidants in red wine however it is unlikely that the benefits of the antioxidants outweigh the dangers of alcohol red wine contains beneficial antioxidants but bear in mind that it should only be consumed in moderation recently however a new study proposed that these same antioxidants could form the basis of a new stent for use during angioplasty the process where narrow or obstructed veins are widened to treat atherosclerosis the researchers behind that study are currently developing a new kind of stent that releases red winelike antioxidants into the blood to promote healing prevent blood clotting and reduce inflammation during angioplasty it is worth noting that drinking alcohol in general is not healthy for your heart in fact it is vitally important for cardiovascular health to drink alcohol in moderation if at all 14 spinach you can help to maintain a healthy heart rhythm by regularly consuming good sources of magnesium spinach is one of the best sources of dietary magnesium and consumption of popeyes favorite food is associated with a raft of health benefits 15 tomatoes tomatoes have lots of nutrients that might help keep our hearts healthy the little red fruits are chockfull of fiber potassium vitamin c folate and choline which are all good for the heart as well as helping to keep heart disease at bay potassium benefits muscles and bones and helps prevent kidney stones from forming scientists have argued that increasing potassium intake while decreasing sodium intake is the most important dietary change when attempting to reduce the risk of heart disease 16 vegetables the aha advise that we eat eight or more servings of fruit and vegetables each day vegetables are low in fat and calories but rich in fiber minerals and vitamins a healthful amount of veggies in the diet can help to moderate weight and blood pressureinsights from a new study by the university of cambridge in the united kingdom about the role of calcium in brain cells signaling mechanisms brings us closer to understanding the causes of parkinsons disease having excess calcium in the brain may be a reason for why parkinsons disease develops the presence of toxic protein deposits or lewy bodies inside brain cells is a recognized hallmark of parkinsons disease the deposits contain clusters of alphasynuclein and other proteins that have folded into the wrong shape the new study now published in the journal nature communications shows that calcium affects the way in which alphasynuclein binds to synaptic vesicles synaptic vesicles are small compartments in nerve terminals that hold the neurotransmitters or chemical messengers that carry signals between brain cells '' there is a fine balance '' notes cofirst author dr amberley stephens a postdoctoral researcher in molecular neuroscience at the university of cambridge `` of calcium and alphasynuclein in the cell and when there is too much of one or the other the balance is tipped and aggregation begins leading to parkinsons disease '' normal vs abnormal alphasynuclein worldwide there are more than 10 million people living with parkinsons disease including around 1 million in the united states in parkinsons disease there is a progressive destruction of brain cells that produce a neurotransmitter called dopamine which is important for controlling movement therefore as the disease progresses there will be a worsening of symptoms such as slowness of movement rigidity tremor and impaired coordination and balance could an existing drug halt parkinsons disease learn how a drug for a rare genetic disorder may be effective against toxic alphasynuclein clusters in brain cells read now more recent studies have revealed that parkinsons also affects brain cells that do not produce dopamine which might explain why some of the symptoms are not movementrelated although abnormal clusters of alphasynuclein a small protein comprising only 140 amino acids is a major element of the lewy bodies that are present in parkinsons disease its normal form appears to be necessary for a number of brain cell functions however apart from knowing that the protein somehow interacts with synaptic vesicles to ensure the smooth transport of molecules across the synapse or the gap between the nerve terminal and the next cell we know little about the underlying mechanism alphasynuclein acts like a calcium sensor '' alphasynuclein '' notes senior study author dr gabriele kaminski schierle of the department of chemical engineering and biotechnology at the university of cambridge `` is a very small protein with very little structure and it needs to interact with other proteins or structures in order to become functional which has made it difficult to study '' advances in microscope technology mean that researchers can now observe what happens inside cells dr kaminski schierle and colleagues used `` superresolution microscopy '' and `` isolated synaptic vesicles '' to examine the detailed behavior of alphasynuclein they found that when the level of calcium rises in the cell alphasynuclein binds to vesicles at more than one point which causes the vesicles to cluster '' we think '' explains cofirst author dr janin lautenschläger also of the department of chemical engineering and biotechnology `` that alphasynuclein is almost like a calcium sensor '' '' in the presence of calcium '' she continues `` it changes its structure and how it interacts with its environment which is likely very important for its normal function '' a delicate balance the authors propose that the abnormal clusters of alphasynuclein form when the delicate balance between the protein and calcium is upset they suggest a number of things that might cause such an imbalance such as agerelated slowing of the elimination of excess protein doubling of alphasynuclein production due to gene duplication higher calcium levels in brain cells vulnerable to parkinsons inability to buffer calcium effectively in parkinsonssensitive cells a more detailed understanding of how alphasynuclein behaves in both health and disease should lead to muchneeded new drugs for parkinsons disease the authors conclude they also note that a drug that blocks the calcium channel in heart disease might `` prove to be a valuable candidate to act against parkinsons disease via lowering intracellular calcium load '' '' this is the first time weve seen that calcium influences the way alphasynuclein interacts with synaptic vesicles '' dr janin lautenschlägertwo new studies confirm the hypothesis that the psychoactive compound found in `` magic mushrooms '' may be a useful new treatment for depression avoiding some of the side effects of conventional antidepressants magic mushrooms or shrooms may hold surprising benefits for our mental health at medical news today we have reported on a range of studies that pointed to psilocybin the psychoactive substance in `` magic mushrooms '' as a potential remedy for depression two such studies showed that the psychoactive compound can reduce feelings of anxiety and depression in people with advanced cancer while another small trial suggested that the compound could succeed where previous depression treatment has failed treating depression can be challenging not only because some depression types are treatmentresistant but also because existing therapies have a range of unwanted side effects one such adverse effect frequently reported by people living with depression is the `` emotional blunting '' indifference or apathy that comes with taking antidepressants a new study which was carried out by researchers at imperial college london icl in the united kingdom suggests that magic mushrooms could treat depression while avoiding these side effects the new research consists of two studies both of which were led by leor roseman a member of the psychedelic research group at icl participants felt emotionally reconnected in the first study published in the journal neuropharmacology 20 people diagnosed with moderate to severe depression that conventional treatment had not alleviated participated in two dosing sessions with the magic mushroom compound using functional mri fmri the team scanned the brains of the participants while they looked at pictures of emotive expressions the scans were taken before and after each drug intervention in order to assess the impact of the treatment on depression the subjects were all provided with psychological support before during and after the intervention after the treatment the participants reported feeling better `` emotionally reconnected and accepting '' the fmri scans also revealed a stronger brain response to emotive faces specifically the scientists saw more activity in the brains amygdala which is an emotionprocessing area associated with depression the study authors explain '' based on the present results we propose that psilocybin with psychological support is a treatment approach that potentially revives emotional responsiveness in depression enabling patients to reconnect with their emotions '' roseman comments on the new findings saying that they `` are important as they reveal biological changes after psilocybin therapy and more specifically they suggest that increased emotional processing is crucial for the treatment to work '' but the authors also caution that more research is needed to establish firmly whether the positive effects were due to the psychoactive compound itself the psychological counseling or the interruption of the antidepressant treatment the subjects had been on before the study '' having a healthy control group in future studies should be helpful in answering some of these questions '' roseman admits mystical experience improves efficacy the second paper published in the journal frontiers in pharmacology examined whether or not the quality of the psychedelic experience was linked with the success of the treatment roseman and colleagues gave questionnaires to another group of 20 volunteers who underwent two treatment sessions with psilocybin what to know about avoiding depression here are seven tips that may help you to avoid a depression relapse read now the researchers looked at the socalled feeling of oceanic boundlessness which is a `` mysticaltype experience '' involving feelings of unity and a lack of boundaries between the self and the universe the study revealed that the more strongly the participants felt this experience the better was their mental health in the longterm depressive symptoms subsided and the mental benefits lasted for weeks after the treatment in participants who reported a strong mystical experience '' future therapeutic work with psychedelics may consider investigating ways which enhance mysticaltype experience and reduce anxiety given the growing evidence that this serves the efficacy of the treatment model '' conclude the authors directions for future research the researchers are planning on carrying out larger trials with a healthy control group in which the effects of psilocybin could be compared with an existing antidepressant '' we also want to investigate how the amygdala responds a longer time after treatment '' roseman adds `` which will inform us about longerterm effects compared to the first study which was only looked at 1 day after the therapy '' additionally in light of the findings of their second study the group recommends that future trials with psychedelics should aim to enhance the `` mystical '' aspect of the experiencehiv therapy involves a combination of drugs that must be taken once or twice daily making treatment adherence challenging for many people but researchers may have found a solution to this problem in the form of a pill that only needs to be taken once per week researchers have developed a pill for hiv that would only need to be taken once weekly researchers from the massachusetts institute of technology mit and brigham and womens hospital both located in boston ma have developed an ingestible capsule that can slowly release 1 weeks worth of antiretroviral drugs the teams novel creation has the potential to transform hiv therapy as it means that people may only need to take a single pill once every week rather than multiple medications every day colead study author robert langer the david h koch institute professor at mit and his colleagues believe that their `` pillbox in a capsule '' could combat the current problem of adherence to antiretroviral therapy research has indicated that up to 30 percent of people with hiv fail to stick to their treatment regimen langer and his colleagues recently reported the details of their new creation in the journal nature communications hiv and antiretroviral therapy hiv is a virus that attacks and destroys immune cells that are important for staving off infection and disease if left untreated hiv can progress to aids wherein a persons immune system is so severely damaged that they become vulnerable to serious illnesses in 2016 there were around 367 million people across the globe living with hiv or aids of these individuals around 18 million were newly infected hiv could new injection work as effectively as daily drugs researchers suggest that a new antiretroviral injection may be just as effective as daily medications for hiv read now just 30 years ago hiv was considered by many as a death sentence today the virus can be successfully managed with antiretroviral drugs which work by reducing the level of hiv in the body a combination of different antiretroviral drugs must be taken every day in order for treatment to be successful but patients can find it hard to stick to such a regimen '' one of the main barriers to treating and preventing hiv is adherence '' notes the studys coauthor giovanni traverso of the mits koch institute for integrative cancer research `` the ability to make doses less frequent stands to improve adherence and make a significant impact at the patient level '' '' these slowrelease dosage systems perform equal or better than the current daily doses for hiv treatment in preclinical models '' he adds building the pillbox in a capsule with this in mind the researchers decided to build on an idea that first emerged in 2016 which was an ingestible capsule that could remain in the stomach for 2 weeks and deliver drugs in a previous study langer and his colleagues demonstrated how the capsule could help to treat malaria by slowly releasing controlled doses of the malaria drug ivermectin for their latest study the team looked at whether the capsule could be effective for the treatment of hiv but some design changes were required the original capsule consisted of six arms made of a single strong polymer each arm was loaded with drugs and folded in after ingestion the arms folded out and released the drugs for the treatment of hiv however the capsule would need to be able to release different drugs at different rates something that the original design did not allow as such the team adapted the design the main structure of the new capsule is still built from a single strong polymer but each of the six arms can hold a different medication thanks to the addition of `` release polymers '' '' in a way its like putting a pillbox in a capsule now you have chambers for every day of the week on a single capsule '' says traverso pill effective in pigs to test whether the newly designed capsule could be effective against hiv the researchers loaded it with three different antiretroviral drugs dolutegravir rilpivirine and cabotegravir that are currently used to both prevent and treat hiv on testing the drugloaded capsule on pigs the researchers found that the capsule successfully settled in the animals stomachs and they gradually released each of the three drugs over a 1week period once all of the drugs are released the capsule disintegrates allowing it to be passed through the gastrointestinal tract of course the capsule needs to be tested in humans before it can be used for the prevention and treatment of hiv but the researchers believe that their study results show promise the researchers calculated the potential impact of this onceaweek capsule at population level and they suggest that the pill could boost preventive treatment efficacy for hiv by 20 percent also approximately 200000–800000 new hiv infections could be prevented in south africa over the next 20 years commenting on the findings anthony fauci director of the national institute of allergy and infectious disease which helped to fund the study says `` a longeracting less invasive oral formulation could be one important part of our future arsenal to stop the hivaids pandemic '' '' new and improved tools for hiv treatment and prevention along with wider implementation of novel and existing approaches are needed to end the hiv pandemic as we know it studies such as this help us move closer to achieving this goal '' anthony fauciscientists experimenting with an innovative treatment for cancer have now devised a targeted injection that has already successfully eliminated tumors in mice could one shot administered directly to a solid tumor mark the end of cancer research devising more effective treatments for all types of cancer has been abundant over the past few years offering new hope all the time some of the most recent experiments include using stateoftheart nanotechnology to hunt down microtumors engineering microbes to thwart cancer cells and starving malignant tumors to death the latest study from stanford university school of medicine in california has investigated the potential of yet another approach injecting `` minute '' amounts of two agents that stimulate the bodys immune response directly into a malignant solid tumor so far their studies using mice have proven successful `` when we use these two agents together '' explains senior study author dr ronald levy `` we see the elimination of tumors all over the body '' '' this approach bypasses the need to identify tumorspecific immune targets and doesnt require wholesale activation of the immune system or customization of a patients immune cells '' dr ronald levy moreover the researchers have reason to believe in a speedier trajectory toward clinical trials for this method since one of the agents involved has already been approved for use in human therapy while the other is already under clinical trial for lymphoma treatment the studys findings were published yesterday in the journal science translational medicine onetime application of formula dr levy specializes in the use of immunotherapy which is a type of treatment wherein the bodys immune response is enhanced so that it can target cancer cells to fight lymphoma or cancer of the lymphatic system there are several types of immunotherapy including some that boost the entire immune system of the body and others that are a lot more targeted but the researchers note they all come with caveats attached crossdressing cells may improve cancer treatment what are `` crossdressing '' cells and how could they help us to fight cancer read now they may have problematic side effects be timeconsuming or be simply too costly the teams method however arguably has more benefits even beyond its potential effectiveness as a treatment '' our approach uses a onetime application of very small amounts of two agents to stimulate the immune cells only within the tumor itself '' dr levy explains this method can `` teach '' immune cells how to fight against that specific type of cancer which then allows them to migrate and destroy all other existing tumors although the immune systems role is to detect and eliminate harmful foreign bodies many types of cancer cell are able to evade detection in complex ways which enables them to grow and spread a type of white blood cell called t cells play a vital role in regulating the bodys immune response normally t cells would target and fight cancer tumors but all too often cancer cells learn to `` trick '' them and escape the immune response effective against many types of cancer in the new study dr levy and his team delivered micrograms of two specific agents into one hard tumor site in each of the affected mice the agents in question were cpg oligonucleotide a short stretch of synthetic dna that boosts the immune cells ability to express a receptor called ox40 which is found on the surface of t cells an antibody that binds to the receptor activating the t cells once the t cells are activated some of them migrate to other parts of the body `` hunting down '' and destroying other tumors importantly dr levy and his colleagues note that this method could be used to target a number of different kinds of cancer in each case the t cells will `` learn '' to deal with the specific type of cancer cell that they have been exposed to in the laboratory the scientists first applied this method to the mouse model of lymphoma and 87 out of 90 mice became cancerfree in the other three cases the tumors did recur but they disappeared when the researchers administered the treatment a second time similarly successful results were observed in the mouse model of breast colon and skin cancer also even the mice that were genetically engineered to develop breast cancer spontaneously responded well to this method of treatment a targeted approach however when scientists transplanted two different types of cancer tumor lymphoma and colon cancer in the same animal but only injected the experimental formula into a lymphoma site the results were mixed all the lymphoma tumors did recede but the same did not hold true for the colon cancer tumor confirming that the t cells only learn to deal with the cancer cells that were in their immediate vicinity before the injection as dr levy continues `` this is a very targeted approach only the tumor that shares the protein targets displayed by the treated site is affected were attacking specific targets without having to identify exactly what proteins the t cells are recognizing '' currently the team is preparing a clinical trial to test the effectiveness of this treatment in people with lowgrade lymphoma dr levy hopes that if the clinical trial is successful they will be able to extend this therapy to virtually any kind of cancer tumor in humans '' i dont think theres a limit to the type of tumor we could potentially treat as long as it has been infiltrated by the immune system '' dr levy concludesthe american college of physicians have now published their new guidelines regarding the desired blood sugar control levels for people with type 2 diabetes the recommendations aim to change current therapeutic practices and doctors should aim for a moderate level of blood sugar when treating their patients blood sugar control levels should be moderate for people living with type 2 diabetes according to new guidelines according to the most recent estimates almost 30 million people in the united states have type 2 diabetes which amounts to over 9 percent of the entire us population once diagnosed with type 2 diabetes patients are often advised to take what is known as a glycated hemoglobin hba1c test in order to keep blood sugar levels under control the test averages a persons blood sugar levels over the past 2 or 3 months with an hba1c score of 65 percent indicating diabetes patients who score over 65 percent would then be prescribed a daily insulin based treatment which they can inject themselves rapidacting injections take effect within 5 to 15 minutes but last for a shorter time of 3 to 5 hours longacting injections take effect after 1 or 2 hours and last for between 14 and 24 hours but some studies have pointed out that the hba1c test may currently be overused in the us and they have suggested that such overtesting may lead to overtreating patients with hypoglycemic drugs these drugs often have a range of side effects such as gastrointestinal problems excessively low blood sugar weight gain and even congestive heart failure additionally as some researchers have pointed out `` excessive testing contributes to the growing problem of waste in healthcare and increased patient burden in diabetes management '' in this context the american college of physicians acp set out to examine the existing guidelines from several organizations and the evidence available in an effort to help physicians make better more informed decisions about treating people with type 2 diabetes their guidelines were published in the journal annals of internal medicine an a1c of 7 to 8 percent is recommended as the acp explain the current rationale behind the existing recommendations of a score of 65 percent or below 7 percent is that keeping blood sugar this low would decrease the risk of microvascular complications over time however the acp found that the evidence for such a reduction is `` inconsistent '' as dr jack ende the president of acp puts it `` our analysis of the evidence behind existing guidelines found that treatment with drugs to targets of 7 percent or less compared to targets of about 8 percent did not reduce deaths or macrovascular complications such as heart attack or stroke but did result in substantial harms '' how can you lower your blood sugar levels here are some alternative ways to reduce your blood sugar levels read now he continues saying `` the evidence shows that for most people with type 2 diabetes achieving an a1c between 7 percent and 8 percent will best balance longterm benefits with harms such as low blood sugar medication burden and costs '' additionally the acp recommend that patients who are 80 years old and above or who live with chronic illnesses such as dementia cancer or congestive heart failure receive a treatment that focuses on reducing high blood sugarrelated symptoms instead of lowering hba1c levels the reason for this is that for patients in this category the potential side effects of hypoglycemic drugs outweigh the advantages '' results from studies included in all the guidelines demonstrate that health outcomes are not improved by treating to a1c levels below 65 percent '' dr ende explains '' however reducing drug interventions for patients with a1c levels persistently below 65 percent '' he continues `` will reduce unnecessary medication harms burdens and costs without negatively impacting the risk of death heart attacks strokes kidney failure amputations visual impairment or painful neuropathy '' '' although acps guidance statement focuses on drug therapy to control blood sugar a lower treatment target is appropriate if it can be achieved with diet and lifestyle modifications such as exercise dietary changes and weight loss '' dr jack endeas much of the world experiences a recordbreaking heat wave this spotlight turns its attention to vitamin d the socalled sunshine vitamin here we inspect the latest research the `` sunshine vitamin '' has a range of surprising benefits vitamin d is a hot topic currently with a raft of studies proclaiming its benefits for a variety of serious conditions conversely other recent studies have been more cautious questioning its perceived usefulness for treating some illnesses vitamin d is a nutrient that is synthesized in our skin when it is exposed to sunlight and it is also present in some foods sunlight is the best source of vitamin d but in the winter months the national institutes of health nih recommend topping up vitamin d levels by eating vitamin dcontaining foods each day these include oily fish fortified milk beef liver egg yolks mushrooms and fortified breakfast cereals what does vitamin d do scientists know that vitamin d is essential for many aspects of maintaining good health and that deficiency is linked with problems for both physical and mental health perhaps most notably vitamin d helps to regulate the levels of calcium in our bodies strengthening our bones and preventing boneweakening conditions such as osteoporosis increasingly though studies are also suggesting that vitamin d might have protective benefits against heart failure diabetes cancer respiratory tract infections autoimmune disease and even hair loss a surprisingly large number of people have insufficient levels of vitamin d for instance according to one study more than 40 percent of adults in the united states are deficient because of its prevalence it is important to determine what the public health implications of this epidemic might be symptoms of vitamin d deficiency can vary between individuals but they typically include pain in the joints muscles or bones fatigue breathing problems and low mood or seasonal affective disorder sad below we run through a number of intriguing recent studies that investigate associations between vitamin d and an assortment of illnesses vitamin d and heart failure several studies have suggested that vitamin d could offer protective benefits against cardiovascular illness but scientists have yet to pinpoint what mechanisms are driving this association recently though medical news today reported on a study that used a mouse model to investigate how a type of vitamin d called 125dihydroxyvitamin d3 affects heart cells in particular the researchers looked at the cells responsible for developing scar tissue following a heart attack called cardiac colonyforming unit fibroblasts ccfufs ccfufs are an important area of study because when heart tissue is scarred the heart has a harder time pumping blood which can lead to heart failure the researchers behind the study found that vitamin d inhibited the action of ccfufs which prevented scar tissue from building around the hearts of the mice in the study potentially preventing blockages in the cardiovascular system '' with further study '' wrote the authors `` vitamin d could prove to be an exciting lowcost addition to current treatments and we hope to progress these findings into clinical trials for humans '' vitamin d and cancer breast cancer and bowel cancer have both been linked with cases of vitamin d deficiency in recent studies one of these analyzed data from two randomized clinical trials and a prospective cohort study the researchers found that high levels of vitamin d were inversely associated with risk of breast cancer among women who were cancerfree at baseline studies suggest that vitamin d impacts breast cancer risk according to the study results the higher the levels of vitamin d the lower the risk of breast cancer this relationship remained significant even after the results were adjusted for confounding factors such as age body mass index bmi intake of calcium supplements and smoking habits although a link between vitamin d deficiency and colorectal cancer has previously been reported not all studies have been able to replicate these findings a new largescale study attempted to settle this by drawing on data from three continents including 5700 colorectal cancer cases and 7100 controls antifungal drug kills dormant colorectal cancer cells new research suggests that an existing antifungal drug could be effective against particularly persistent colorectal cancer cells read now the researchers calculated that people whose levels of vitamin d fall below those specified in the current guidelines have a 31 percent increased risk of developing bowel cancer by contrast those with vitamin d levels above the current recommended levels were 22 percent less likely to develop this cancer vitamin d and belly fat another recent study examined a previously observed link between obesity and lower levels of vitamin d focusing in particular on how different types of body fat might interact with vitamin d the study authors reported that having excess belly fat was linked with lower levels of vitamin d '' the strong relationship between increasing amounts of abdominal fat and lower levels of vitamin d suggests that individuals with larger waistlines are at a greater risk of developing deficiency and should consider having their vitamin d levels checked '' however the study was not able to prove whether a deficiency in vitamin d causes fat to be stored around the belly or if having belly fat somehow contributes to a deficiency in vitamin d the researchers say that future studies will attempt to determine cause and effect in this relationship vitamin d and alzheimers disease a systematic review from researchers in australia recently attempted to settle the debate surrounding vitamin ds ability to protect against alzheimers the systematic review analyzed more than 70 studies looking at the association they concluded that there was no significant association between vitamin d deficiency and risk of alzheimers intriguingly the authors did suggest that based on their systematic review there may be an association between exposure to the suns ultraviolet rays and protection against multiple sclerosis parkinsons disease and alzheimers but that this may be independent of vitamin d production the authors said that further studies would be needed to confirm these links and identify the mechanism responsible for such associations vitamin d and chronic pain over the years some scientists have theorized that low levels of vitamin d might cause or worsen chronic pain so in 2015 a group of scientists set out to collate existing evidence to examine the relationship could vitamin d ease chronic pain the resulting cochrane review updated in 2015 explains that '' observational and circumstantial evidence suggests that there may be a role for vitamin d deficiency in the etiology of chronic painful conditions '' the team scrutinized the findings from a number of studies following the analysis they concluded that the available scientific evidence is not strong enough to support a connection between vitamin d deficiency and chronic pain the authors write `` based on this evidence a large beneficial effect of vitamin d across different chronic painful conditions is unlikely whether vitamin d can have beneficial effects in specific chronic painful conditions needs further investigation '' so as ever more work will be needed to finally close the lid on this interaction we hope this article has enhanced your understanding of the latest scientific thinking around this fascinating chemical please remember however that overexposure to sunlight especially the hot midday sun can result in skin damage and increase risk of skin cancerit is still unclear what causes multiple sclerosis but new research closes in on the faulty immune system mechanisms involved in the development of this condition new research has identified another type of immune cell that may play a role in ms multiple sclerosis ms which is an autoimmune disease causes the immune system to mistakenly attack myelin myelin is the substance that coats axons which are the projections that allow neurons to connect and transmit information this process is known as demyelination and it affects the correct functioning of the central nervous system the condition is characterized by problems with balance and coordination as well as with eyesight to name but a few of its effects in the united states ms affects 250000–350000 people researchers still dont know for sure what causes ms but little by little they are uncovering the mechanisms at play and revealing more of the cellular culprits involved now neurologist roland martin and immunologist mireia sospedra at the university of zurich and university hospital zurich both in switzerland and colleagues have shown that a type of immune cell called b cells are key to the autoimmune reactions that characterize ms in a study whose results are now published in the journal cell the scientists explain that b cells influence the activity of another type of immune cell t cells which then cause inflammation '' we were able to show for the first time that certain b cells the cells of the immune system that produce antibodies activate the specific t cells that cause inflammation in the brain and nerve cell lesions '' roland martin b cells influence t cells studies into ms will tend to focus on the role played by t cells in the development of this condition since t cells are tasked with triggering an appropriate immune response once they detect the presence of pathogens when t cells malfunction and mistake healthy cells in the body for pathogens this causes harmful lesions and inflammation associated with autoimmune diseases such as ms ms new drug proven to slow brain shrinkage will this new drug vastly improve ms treatment read now martin and colleagues however found that the t cells may actually be mistakenly activated by other specialized immune cells the b cells this became apparent to the researchers after they observed the effects of certain drugs used to treat ms martin says `` a class of ms drugs called rituximab and ocrelizumab led us to believe that b cells also played an important part in the pathogenesis of the disease '' these drugs the authors note halt brain inflammation by removing b cells which suggests that these immune cells are ultimately responsible for the t cells activity a chain of reactions in order to better understand the role played by b cells in inflammation the researchers analyzed blood samples from people with ms through an experimental in vitro method they noticed that b cells were interacting with specialized t cells boosting their activity and influencing them to divide more thus feeding their attack cycle it became clear that b cells were the cause of t cell activity because when they eliminated the former the latter stopped proliferating '' this means that we can now explain the previously unclear mechanism of these ms drugs '' explains martin the investigators also note that the activated t cells they studied in the blood samples include the population of t cells that are active in brain inflammation related to ms martin and his team suggest that the t cells are able to read both the proteins released by b cells and recognize the nerve cells in the brain the scientists say that t cells are first activated in the peripheral blood only to migrate to the brain where they end up attacking myelin '' our findings not only explain how new ms drugs take effect but also pave the way for novel approaches in basic research and therapy for ms '' says martinafter tumor removal surgery treatment with erectile dysfunction drugs and a flu vaccine may help to stop the cancer returning these common medications could help to prevent cancer returning these drugs aided by the flu vaccine remove a block to the immune system that can sometimes result from cancer surgery and also give it a boost this was the conclusion that researchers at the university of ottawa in canada came to after they tested the effect of tadalafil cialis sildenafil viagra and an inactivated version of the flu vaccine agriflu in mouse models of postsurgery metastasis in a paper now published in the journal oncoimmunology they report how the unusual combination reduced cancer spread in the mice by over 90 percent a clinical trial to test the effects and safety of the treatment in humans is already under way googleadslotinfopush { '' slotname '' mnt_dlb1 '' slotcontainer '' mnt_dlb1_container } surgery can promote metastasis '' surgery '' says senior study author rebecca c auer an associate professor in the department of biochemistry microbiology and immunology `` is very effective in removing solid tumors '' but as she and her colleagues explain in their paper `` cancer surgery '' can also block the immune systems ability to eliminate any remaining cancer cells which can then spread to form new secondary tumors in a process known as metastasis viagra may cut colorectal cancer risk by half giving mice a small daily dose of viagra reduced the formation of polyps by 50 percent read now metastasis accounts for the vast majority of deaths to cancer and is the main reason that the disease is so serious the immune system has many cells that patrol the body in search of potentially harmful agents to destroy these agents are not just bacteria viruses and other pathogens but also cancer cells cancer surgery can undermine the immune system by `` altering the function of natural killer nk cells '' which are white blood cells that play a key role in clearing away metastatic cancer cells googleadslotinfopush { '' slotname '' mnt_dlb2 '' slotcontainer '' mnt_dlb2_container } surgery weakens natural killer cells tests of animals and human patients have shown that tumor surgery can weaken the ability of nk cells to attack and kill cancer cells for up to 1 month after the procedure prof auer and colleagues found that surgery does this in a roundabout way it stimulates another group of immune cells called myeloid derived suppressor cells mdscs which in turn will then inhibit the nk cells the new study shows that the erectile dysfunction drugs remove the brakes on the nk cells by targeting the `` surgeryinduced '' mdscs while the flu vaccine gives the nk cells an additional boost the researchers tested various combinations of the drugs and vaccine in mouse models of postoperative metastasis they evaluated the effectiveness of treatment by counting the number of metastases that arose in the lungs of the animals the results showed that on average without surgery the cancer spread and gave rise to 37 metastases surgery with no drugs or vaccine resulted in 129 metastases giving one erectile dysfunction drug after surgery limited the spread to 24 metastases giving one erectile dysfunction drug and the flu vaccine after surgery limited spread to just 11 metastases clinical trial the clinical trial that is already under way involves 24 patients who are having surgery to remove an abdominal tumor at the ottawa hospital the purpose of the small trial is to evaluate the safety of the treatment which is based on cialis and agriflu and observe how it affects the immune system should the trial be successful the next stage will be larger trials that assess the potential benefits prof auer says that she and her colleagues are `` really excited '' about their work because it may show that `` two safe and relatively inexpensive therapies may be able to solve a big problem in cancer '' '' if confirmed in clinical trials this could become the first therapy to address the immune problems caused by cancer surgery '' prof rebecca c auera new study conducted by researchers at stanford university in california reveals that common foods can cause blood sugar spikes in otherwise healthy people paying closer attention to these spikes could prevent diabetes and some of its complications over the course of a day blood sugar levels may spike to diabetic and prediabetic levels even in healthy individuals diabetes affects over 30 million people in the united states which is almost 10 percent of the population an additional 84 million people have prediabetes abnormal blood sugar levels are a hallmark of this metabolic disease to measure these levels physicians use two main methods they either take fasting blood sugar samples which informs them of the level of sugar in the blood at that specific point or they measure levels of glycated hemoglobin hba1c the glycated hemoglobin test is routinely used to diagnose diabetes and it relies on the average levels of blood sugar over a period of 3 months despite their widespread use neither of these methods can say anything about the fluctuations in blood sugar that happen over the course of a day so researchers led by michael snyder who is a professor of genetics at stanford set out to monitor these daily fluctuations in otherwise healthy individuals they looked at the patterns of blood sugar change after a meal and examined how these patterns vary between different people who have had the same meal prof snyder and colleagues published the results of their research in the journal plos biology three types of blood sugar variability for their study the researchers recruited 57 adults aged 51 years on average who had not been diagnosed with diabetes prof snyder and team used novel devices called continuous glucose monitors to assess the blood sugar of the participants in their normal environment also the researchers evaluated the participants wholebody insulin resistance and insulin secretion the blood sugar and metabolic measurements allowed the researchers to group the participants into three different `` glucotypes '' based on the patterns of blood sugar variability type 2 diabetes new guidelines lower blood sugar control levels the latest recommendations from the american college of physicians aim to change how physicians treat their patients read now people whose blood sugar did not vary much were grouped under `` low variability '' those whose blood sugar was found to spike quite often were grouped under `` severe variability '' and finally people who fell in between were classified as the `` moderate '' glucotype the findings revealed that `` glucose dysregulation as characterized by continuous glucose monitoring is more prevalent and heterogeneous than previously thought and can affect individuals considered normoglycemic by standard measures '' glucose often in prediabetic diabetic range next the researchers wanted to see how people of different glucotypes reacted to the same meal so they offered all the participants three types of standard breakfasts cornflakes with milk bread with peanut butter and a protein bar each participant responded uniquely to these breakfasts which suggests that different people metabolize the same food in different ways additionally the study revealed that common foods such as corn flakes caused significant blood sugar spikes in most people '' we were very surprised to see blood sugar in the prediabetic and diabetic range in these people so frequently the idea is to try to find out what makes someone a spiker and be able to give them actionable advice to shift them into the low glucotype '' prof michael snyder '' our next study will delve into the physiological causes of glucose dysregulation '' continues the senior investigator `` these include not only genetic variation but also microbiome composition and pancreas liver and digestive organ functions '' the researchers hope that their recent and future findings will help to prevent diabetes and its complicationsnumerous people in the united states and across the world are dog lovers and no wonder dogs can be loyal loving friends and a source of spontaneous joy but dogs that are stressed scared injured or ill can easily cause harm to unsuspecting humans is our behavior part of the problem a new study looks to youtube videos to understand why some dogs bite and who is more likely to get bitten dogs are for the most part our best friends many of us have given in to the temptation of petting a strangers adorable trusting dog as it passed us on our evening walk in most cases nothing other than a moment of delight with a friendly animal takes place sometimes however dogs have been known to turn from friend to foe and suddenly snap and bite at a hand outstretched to pat some studies suggest that all in all around 1000 persons end up in emergency rooms every day due to dog bites and in some cases infected wounds may place a person at risk of rabies or tetanus but the reasons behind why dogs that may otherwise seem affectionate and approachable become aggressive are not always straightforward and researchers dont have much to go on to try to understand why humans most loyal companion unexpectedly becomes aggressive at times usually data rely on information provided by individuals who have already been bitten and they may only offer an incomplete or unreliable account of the encounter but recently investigators from the university of liverpool in the united kingdom have turned to an unexpected source of information that they hope may offer a better perspective on the context in which biting takes place youtube videos '' online videos present us with an unexplored opportunity to observe dog bites firsthand something which is just not possible using other methods '' says lead study author sara owczarczakgarstecka adding '' making more use of this type of shared content for research could help us better understand how and why bites occur and contribute to the development of bite prevention strategies '' the researchers findings were published in the journal scientific reports children and infants get bitten more often the scientists methodology was fairly simple they used telling keywords including `` dog bite '' and `` dog attack '' to search youtube for videos depicting individuals getting bitten by dogs owczarczakgarstecka and team ended up analyzing 143 clips showing 362 bites uploaded to the popular website between january 2016 and march 2017 in each case the researchers assessed the context in which the dog ended up biting a person the severity of the bite who got bitten and what breed the dog pertained to in 56 of the clips the researchers were also able to ascertain what behavior both humans and dogs exhibited prior to the bite owczarczakgarstecka and team found that of the dog breeds often chosen as pets it was mostly chihuahuas german shepherds pit bulls and labrador retrievers that appeared to do the biting yet more often than not the `` offenders '' were crossbreed dogs how does rabies cause aggression dogs infected with rabies become extremely aggressive and dangerous what are the biological mechanisms behind this disease read now about 7 in 10 of the people who got bitten were male and in more than half of the situations the victims were children or infants the researchers warn that due to the relatively small number of video samples that they analyzed they were unable to establish clear relationships of causality between certain types of human behavior and instances of aggression in dogs however they did note that in many cases `` tactile contact with a dog '' became more insistent 21 seconds before the biting and that individuals getting bitten often stood or leant over the dog still owczarczakgarstecka and team admit that they struggled with some limitations especially the fact that youtube videos may be biased users the researchers surmised may be more likely to upload videos in which small dogs such as chihuahuas do the biting as these may be perceived as funnier and more likely to attract a larger number of viewers the researchers next step from here will be to study the behavior of people who interact with dogs in greater depth as well as their perception of dog bites and when they take place in order to do so they plan to interview dog owners people who work with dogs and those who have previously been bitten '' the findings '' owczarczakgarstecka explains `` could offer some valuable new insight for the development of bite prevention strategies '' '' prevention messages could emphasize the risk of leaning over a dog and simply advise avoiding contact with a dog when possible or in doubt '' she concludesdespite our best efforts to remain thin it seems that during the holiday season we put on a lot of weight why is that a new study has a surprising answer how much sunlight we get may influence how much weight we lose suggests new research plenty of us are familiar with the holiday weight phenomenon but while it is true that during the holidays were more exposed to delicious food than the rest of the year some studies have shown that in winter we continue to pack on the pounds despite conscious efforts to lose them why a new study by researchers at the university of alberta in edmonton canada reveals an unexpected culprit for winter weight gain the absence of sunlight the researchers who were led by the auspiciously named peter light from the alberta diabetes institute examined the effect of sunlight on subcutaneous fat cells or white fat cells that can be found right beneath our skin the results of their investigation make this a breakthrough study and it was recently published in the journal scientific reports how sunlight burns fat light and team examined the socalled subcutaneous white adipose tissue scwat which as the authors explain is the `` major fat depot in humans and a central player in regulating whole body metabolism '' white fat is known as the `` bad '' type of fat because it stores calories that are ideally burned for energy if dysfunctional this type of fat can lead to cardiometabolic disorders such as obesity diabetes and heart disease new drug could shrink harmful fat cells what if there was a magic pill that could help you to lose weight without any of the effort read now so in an attempt to help people with type 1 diabetes light and colleagues were working on a way to genetically engineer these white fat cells to produce insulin when exposed to light accidentally they discovered that scwat cells tend to shrink under the effect of the suns socalled blue light that is the visible type of light that boosts attention and mood during the day to further test their discovery the scientists took samples of scwat from patients undergoing weight loss surgery and examined the effect of the suns blue light on the fat cells this is what they found '' when the suns blue light wavelengths the light we can see with our eye penetrate our skin and reach the fat cells just beneath lipid droplets reduce in size and are released out of the cell in other words our cells dont store as much fat '' peter light winter weight gain explained '' if you flip our findings around '' light says `` the insufficient sunlight exposure we get 8 months of the year living in a northern climate may be promoting fat storage and contribute to the typical weight gain some of us have over winter '' '' its early days but its not a giant leap to suppose that the light that regulates our circadian rhythm received through our eyes may also have the same impact through the fat cells near our skin '' he adds the findings may pave the way for new weight loss strategies or lightbased therapies in the treatment of obesity and diabetes however light cautions against taking these findings too literally and pursuing sunlight exposure in order to lose weight as there are still many variables that remain unknown '' for example '' he explains `` we dont yet know the intensity and duration of light necessary for this pathway to be activated '' additionally he notes `` there is a lot of literature out there suggesting our current generation will be more overweight than their parents and maybe this feeds into the debate about what is healthy sunshine exposure '' either way this exciting discovery `` certainly holds many fascinating clues for our team and others around the world to explore '' light concludestoo much salt can cause cognitive deficits according to a new study published in the journal nature neuroscience luckily these negative effects may be reversed and the new study shows how too much salt in our diet can have devastating effects on our brain power and new research reveals the mechanism behind this its a wellknown fact that too much salt in our diet raises the risk of cardiovascular disease and high blood pressure but it is less known that brainrelated problems such as cerebrovascular disease stroke and cognitive impairment have all been linked to dietary salt as the authors of the new research explain it was suggested that one possible mechanism behind these negative effects involves the socalled endothelial cells inside the cerebral blood vessels endothelial cells line our blood vessels and are responsible for regulating the vascular tone but a high dietary intake of salt has been associated with dysfunction of these cells although it is known that epithelial dysfunction can bring a plethora of chronic illnesses it remains unclear exactly how saltinduced endothelial dysfunction may affect the brain in the long run this is particularly important given that the brain is heavily reliant on a steady and smooth flow of oxygen to function properly explain the study authors who were led in their research efforts by costantino iadecola from weill cornell medicine in new york city ny in their paper iadecola and colleagues show how excessive dietary salt affects our gut immune system and ultimately our brain how excessive salt affects the gutbrain axis iadecola and team fed a group of mice the equivalent of a human diet high in salt for a period of 12 weeks after the first few weeks endothelial dysfunction as well as a reduction in the blood flow to the brain could be noticed in the mice additionally behavioral tests revealed cognitive decline in the rodents their blood pressure however remained unchanged an important discovery was the increase in the guts socalled th17 white blood cells in turn the high number of th17 cells led to an increase in the levels of a proinflammatory molecule called plasma interleukin17 il17 researchers reveal how to boost brain power scientists reveal a braintraining method proven to boost your working memory read now the researchers were also able to identify the molecular pathway through which higher levels of il17 in the blood led to the negative cognitive and cerebrovascular effects the researchers wanted to see whether or not their findings would replicate in human cells so they treated human endothelial cells with il17 and obtained similar results as iadecola and his colleagues explain '' the findings unveil a gutbrain axis by which environmental factors linked to the diet lead to an adaptive immune response in the gut promoting neurovascular dysregulation and cognitive impairment '' dietary changes can reverse negative effects the good news is that the negative effects of the highsalt diet seem to be reversible the mice were returned to a normal diet after the 12 weeks and the results were encouraging '' the harmful effects of a highsalt diet were abrogated by returning the mice to a normal diet pointing to the reversibility of the vascular dysfunction and cognitive impairment '' write the authors additionally they experimented with a drug that also reversed the effects of excessive salt the amino acid larginine had the same beneficial effect on the mice as returning them to a normal diet the findings suggest that lifestyle changes or a new class of drugs may help to offset the negative effects of a highsalt dietnew research published in the journal appetite suggests that when it comes to dieting its not how much you eat but rather what you eat that influences calorie intake the most opting for more healthful foods such as salads may be more important than the amount of food that we eat faris zuraikat a graduate student in the department of nutritional sciences at pennsylvania state university led the new study which follows up from a previous 1year randomized controlled trial that investigated how different food portions influenced weight loss the former trial aimed to explore the socalled `` portion size effect '' which occurs when people are served bigger portions than what they originally wanted but end up eating more nonetheless to this end the previous trial trained the participants to gain more control over their portions presenting them with useful strategies for portion size management in this new trial study the researchers wanted to see if people who had been previously trained to manage their portions would respond differently to increasing portion sizes by comparison with untrained people as the studys first author explains the researchers `` were also interested in whether those untrained individuals with overweight and obesity or normal weight differed in their response '' calorie intake vs portion size effect to find out the researchers gathered three groups of women 34 women who were overweight and had not participated in the previous trial 29 healthy `` control '' women who had a regular weight and who had also not participated in the trial and finally 39 women with overweight and obesity who had taken part in the portioncontrolling trial during the study all women were served the same foods once a week for 4 weeks but the size of their food increased in a random order what are the best foods for weight loss in the spirit of `` its not how much you eat but what you eat '' here are some foods that promote weight loss according to available research read now additionally and significantly the calorie content of the food served also varied the foods ranged from highcalorie ones such as garlic bread to lowcalorie foods such as salads the study revealed that when given bigger portions the women across all three groups consumed more food however the participants who had been trained in portion control in the previous trial consumed fewer calories than the untrained participants '' the lower energy intake of trained participants was attributable to consuming meals with a greater proportion of lowerenergy density foods than controls '' write the authors '' all the groups were served the same meals but their food choices differed '' explains the studys lead author `` the participants who went through the training consumed more of the lower caloriedense foods and less of the higher caloriedense foods than the untrained controls '' '' consequently trained participants calorie intake was less than that of the control groups whose intake didnt differ by weight status '' why choosing lowcalorie food is important the studys lead researcher explains the significance of the findings saying `` the results show that choosing healthy lowercaloriedense foods was more effective and more sustainable than just trying to resist large portions of higher calorie options '' '' if you choose highcaloriedense foods but restrict the amount that youre eating portions will be too small and youre likely to get hungry '' zuraikat goes on barbara rolls a professor of nutritional sciences at penn state and a coauthor on the study also chimes in '' the study supports the idea that eating less of the highercaloriedense foods and more of the nutritious lowercaloriedense foods can help to manage hunger while consuming fewer calories '' barbara rolls '' you still have a full plate '' she adds `` but youre changing the proportions of the different types of foods '' the findings are particularly significant given that people who want to lose weight are often told that eating `` a bit of everything '' helps as long as the food is consumed in moderation on the contrary the new research seems to suggest that opting for more nutritious lowcalorie foods is far more important than trying to eat lessthe findings of a new study might hold promise for the future of treating chronic autoimmune conditions such as systemic lupus and autoimmune liver disease according to its authors researchers suggest that targeting a specific gut bacterium could help to prevent autoimmune disease in the study researchers from yale university in new haven ct discovered that bacteria in the small intestine can travel to other organs and induce an autoimmune response importantly the team also found that this reaction can be treated by targeting the bacteria with an antibiotic or vaccine the study results were recently published in the journal science in autoimmune diseases the immune system mistakingly attacks healthy cells and tissues some of the most common autoimmune diseases include type 1 diabetes lupus and celiac disease according to the national institutes of health nih around 235 million people in the united states are affected by autoimmune diseases a variety of autoimmune conditions have been linked to bacteria in the gut using a mouse model the yale team specifically looked at a bacterium called enterococcus gallinarum which can travel beyond the gut to the spleen lymph nodes and liver the team found that e gallinarum provoked an autoimmune response in the mice when it traveled beyond the gut the researchers were able to replicate this mechanism using cultured human liver cells and they also found e gallinarum to be present in the livers of people who have autoimmune disease how your gut bacteria may protect you from cancer not all gut bacteria are bad researchers reveal how they could help to prevent cancer read now by administering an antibiotic or vaccine to target e gallinarum the scientists then found that it was possible to suppress the autoimmune reaction in the mice and prevent the bacterium from growing '' when we blocked the pathway leading to inflammation '' says senior study author martin kriegel `` we could reverse the effect of this bug on autoimmunity '' '' the vaccine against e gallinarum was a specific approach as vaccinations against other bacteria we investigated did not prevent mortality and autoimmunity '' martin kriegel kriegel adds that the team plans to further study the biological mechanisms that are associated with e gallinarum and the implications that they might have for systemic lupus and autoimmune liver disease study adds to previous research the new study complements previous studies that have uncovered a link between gut bacteria and autoimmune diseases studies in mice for example have found that the colonization of the gut by some bacteria can lay the groundwork for the development of autoimmune disorders in the future these bacteria can cause changes in the tissue of the gut resulting in the production of antibodies that attack cells in conditions such as systemic lupus previously medical news today covered a study that suggested that altering gut bacteria might help to alleviate lupus symptoms the study published in the journal applied and environmental microbiology showed that species of lactobacillus in the gut of a lupus mouse model were linked to a reduction of lupus symptoms while the lachnospiraceae bacteria were associated with worsening symptoms of lupus '' the use of probiotics prebiotics and antibiotics '' said husen zhang first author of that study `` has the potential to alter microbiota dysbiosis which in turn could improve lupus symptoms ''new data presented at the annual meeting of the endocrine society held in chicago il suggests that consuming lowcalorie sweeteners could put people at risk of metabolic syndrome are lowcalorie sweeteners worse for health than they seem around 34 percent of adults in the united states have metabolic syndome the umbrella term for high blood pressure high blood sugar high cholesterol levels and abdominal fat we know that metabolic syndrome doubles the risk of heart disease and disease of the blood vessels putting individuals at risk of heart disease and stroke people with metabolic syndrome are also three to five times more likely to develop type 2 diabetes recently on medical news today we looked at how metabolic syndrome could be managed by yoga a study published in the scandinavian journal of medicine science in sports found that participants who took part in a yearlong yoga training course demonstrated a decrease in proinflammatory adipokines and an increase antiinflammatory adipokines adipokines are signaling proteins that instruct the immune system to either increase or decrease inflammation so it appeared that yoga benefitted the people with metabolic syndrome by reducing inflammation allowing them to better manage their symptoms another recent study even suggested that compounds found in beer could provide significant health benefits for people with metabolic syndrome by helping to improve insulin resistance in the new study researchers from george washington university in washington dc examined the effects of a lowcalorie sweetener called sucralose on human stem cells from fat tissue these were experimented on in petri dishes that simulated an obesitypromoting environment lowcalorie sweeteners increase fat formation study finds learn more about how lowcalorie sweeteners may actually increase the formation of fat read now the scientists mimicked the typical concentration of sucralose in the blood of people who consume high quantities of lowcalorie sweeteners when this was administered to the stem cells the team noticed increased expression of genes linked with fat production and inflammation the authors followed this up with a separate experiment involving biopsy samples of abdominal fat from people who were regular consumers of lowcalorie sweeteners in fat samples from people that were a healthy weight they did not find a significant increase in gene expression but in the fat samples from overweight or obese participants there was significant overexpression of fatproducing and inflammationinducing genes the study authors believe that these patterns in gene expression create conditions favorable to metabolic syndrome which in turn increases risk of prediabetes and diabetes findings should be of concern study coauthor sabyasachi sen who is an associate professor of medicine at george washington university describes the results '' our stem cellbased studies indicate that lowcalorie sweeteners promote additional fat accumulation within cells compared with cells not exposed to these substances in a dosedependent fashion meaning that as the dose of sucralose is increased more cells showed increased fat droplet accumulation '' '' this most likely occurs by increasing glucose entry into cells through increased activity of genes called glucose transporters '' prof sen explains that these findings should be of particular concern to people who are obese and have prediabetes or diabetes as these people are already at increased risk for heart attack and strokes the scientists believe that the overexpression in fatrelated genes is more pronounced in these people because they have increased amounts of glucose in their blood which creates insulin resistanceusing a new approach scientists have located a compound that stops the spread of breast pancreatic and prostate cancers in mice cancer metastasis could one day be halted by metarrestin the compound which they call metarrestin destroys a unique structure inside the nucleus of cancer cells that can spread and form new tumors a paper on the work in which researchers from the national institutes of health nih collaborated with those from northwestern university feinberg school of medicine in chicago il is published in science translational medicine in describing how metarrestin works cocorresponding study author sui huang who works as an associate professor of cell and molecular biology at northwestern university feinberg school of medicine likens it to a `` dirty bomb against cancer '' '' it could potentially result in a better outcome for patients with solid tumor cancers with high potential to spread to other organs '' she adds metastasis the final frontier cancer would not be such a potentially serious disease if it were not capable of metastasis which is a complex process wherein cancer cells escape the primary tumor and invade nearby or distant tissue to form new secondary tumors '' what kills people '' prof huang explains `` is when cancer spreads to other organs such as when breast cancer spreads to the brain liver lungs or bones '' cancer new drug may fight treatment resistance a new compound that blocks a molecule that cancer cells use to transcribe genetic information shows promise in treating drugresistant tumors read now metastasis is sometimes referred to as `` the last frontier of cancer research '' it accounts for around 90 percent of cancer deaths and this figure has not altered much in half a century once a cancer reaches the metastatic stage it becomes very difficult to treat with current methods which are much more effective at tackling the primary tumor '' many drugs '' explains cocorresponding study author dr juan jose marugan group leader of the chemical genomics center at the nihs national center for advancing translational sciences in rockville md `` are aimed at stopping cancer growth and killing cancer cells '' but so far no drug has been approved that is designed specifically against metastasis he adds metarrestin kills perinucleolar compartments metarrestin destroys a littleunderstood structure inside the nucleus of cancer cells that is known as the `` perinucleolar compartment pnc '' tests on laboratorycultured cancer cells and cells sampled from human tumors have shown that `` pncs selectively form in cells from solid tumors '' also in previous work prof huang and her team had discovered that the likelihood of cancer spread was greater when tumor cells had more pncs this led the team to wonder whether attacking pncs might reduce cancer spread and improve patients prospects in this study the scientists used `` highthroughput screening followed by chemical optimization '' to assess which compound from a list of at least 140000 might have the greatest power to destroy pncs in metastatic cancer cells they whittled down the list to 100 compounds and then they identified one that destroyed pncs in metastatic prostate cancer cells a modified version of the compound became metarrestin which `` significantly inhibited metastasis '' in mice grafted with human pancreatic breast and prostate cancer the treated mice also lived longer than untreated mice the researchers intend to apply for metarrestin to enter the food and drug administration fda new drug investigation process later this year after they have run more preclinical tests and collected the data required '' our results show metarrestin is a very promising agent that we should continue to investigate against metastasis '' dr juan jose marugannight shift work has long been linked to poor health now a new study suggests that for women such working patterns could increase the risk of cancer female night shift workers may be at greater cancer risk researchers warn researchers found that women who engaged in longterm night shifts were almost a fifth more likely to develop cancer when compared with women who did not work such shifts on looking at specific cancers the researchers found that women who worked longterm night shifts were at even greater risk of skin cancer breast cancer and lung cancer study coauthor xuelei ma phd of the west china medical center at sichuan university in china and colleagues recently reported their findings in the journal cancer epidemiology biomarkers prevention according to the centers for disease control and prevention cdc nearly 15 million people in the united states have irregular working patterns including night shifts previous research has shown that night shift work can severely disrupt our circadian rhythm this is the internal clock that regulates the bodys physiological processes over a 24hour cycle and it primarily responds to light and dark in the environment shift work has been linked to a wealth of poor health outcomes including obesity heart disease and some types of cancer in the new study ma and colleagues sought to learn more about the link between longterm night shift work and cancer risk overall cancer risk increased by 19 percent the researchers came to their findings by conducting a metaanalysis of 61 studies these included a total of 3909152 participants and more than 114000 cancer cases subjects were from asia australia europe and north america the team used these data to assess how longterm night shift work was associated with the risk of developing 11 cancer types in a separate analysis the researchers looked at whether longterm night shift work among female nurses was linked to the risk of six cancer types how does alcohol cause cancer researchers shed light on how alcohol consumption may lead to the development of cancer read now overall the new study revealed that women who worked longterm night shifts were at 19 percent greater risk of cancer compared with women who did not work longterm night shifts additionally the researchers found that women who engaged in longterm night shift work had a 41 percent greater risk of skin cancer a 32 percent greater risk of breast cancer and an 18 percent increased risk of gastrointestinal cancer in a doseresponse analysis it was also found that each additional 5 years of night shift work was associated with 33 percent increase in breast cancer risk the researchers report further investigation however revealed that the link between night shift work and greater breast cancer risk was only applicable for women who lived in north america or europe '' it is possible that women in these locations have higher sex hormone levels '' ma suggests `` which have been positively associated with hormonerelated cancers such as breast cancer '' a risk factor for common cancers from the analysis of female nurses alone the researchers found that longterm night shift work was linked to a 58 percent greater risk of breast cancer a 35 percent increased risk of gastrointestinal cancer and a 28 percent greater lung cancer risk discussing the possible reasons for the increased cancer risk among female nurses ma speculates that these women may have been more likely to undergo cancer screening due to their profession '' another possible explanation for the increased cancer risk in this population may relate to the job requirements of night shift nursing such as more intensive shifts '' adds ma overall the scientists say that their findings indicate that more needs to be done to protect the health of female shift workers particularly those who engage in such shifts for many years '' our study indicates that night shift work serves as a risk factor for common cancers in women these results might help establish and implement effective measures to protect female night shifters longterm night shift workers should have regular physical examinations and cancer screenings '' xuelei ma phd ma adds that he hopes that this research will encourage larger cohort studies in order to confirm the link between longterm night shift work and cancer among womenmultiple sclerosis can cause debilitating fatigue vision problems impaired balance and coordination and muscle stiffness it is usually disabling and its causes have not yet been clearly identified research from switzerland identifies a key factor that allows immune cells to attack neurons potentially triggering ms in multiple sclerosis ms our immune system mistakenly attacks myelin or the sheath that covers the axon the axon is the projection that allows brain cells to send electric signals carrying information as the damage occurs various functions such as motor and cognitive functions and sight are gradually impaired according to atlas an ms resource put together jointly by the world health organization who and the ms international federation in 2008 on a global level `` the median estimated prevalence of ms is 30 per 100000 '' and the united states has one of the highest prevalences of ms cases what exactly causes ms is yet unclear meaning that currently treatments focus on managing the symptoms of the condition rather than eliminating its biological triggers but emerging research from the university of geneva and the geneva university hospitals both in switzerland may have just brought us one step closer to understanding what drives the development of this disease '' we decided '' explains senior researcher doron merkler `` to analyze the infectious factors in ms by studying the autoimmune reactions provoked by different pathogens '' '' this was to try to pinpoint an element that might influence the development of ms where there has been an infection '' he adds the teams findings were published yesterday in the journal immunity viral pathogen triggers autoimmunity merkler and team decided to test out the immune systems reaction to two different pathogens or diseasecausing bacteria a viral and a bacterial one to understand what might trigger a response consistent with the development of ms to do so they worked with a mouse model injecting each type of pathogen into healthy rodents what they noticed was that a certain type of white blood cell cd8+ t lymphocytes which play a key role in the bodys immune response reacted in similar ways both to the viral and to the bacterial pathogen '' we saw a quantitatively identical immune reaction from the lymphocytes called cd8+ t '' says first author nicolas page sheep disease toxin shines a light on multiple sclerosis is there a relationship between sheep disease and ms read now '' however '' he adds `` only the mouse infected with the viral pathogen developed an inflammatory brain disease reminiscent of ms '' this observation led the scientists to examine gene expression in cd8+ t cells to see how it was affected by the viral pathogen they found that the lymphocytes that had reacted to the bacterium expressed a particular dnabinding factor or proteins that help to organize dna tox tox contributes to the development of certain lymphocytes that then mount an immune response in reaction to foreign bodies that are perceived as threatening in this case as page further explains they `` found that the inflammation environment influences the expression of tox in t lymphocytes and that it could play a role in triggering ms '' how does tox lead to ms but how could the team decide whether tox expression was in fact crucial in the development of an autoimmune disease such as ms they thought that a good way of proving its significance was by repressing the dnabinding factor in the cd8+ t cells of healthy mice what the researchers then noticed was in merklers words that `` although they received the viral pathogen the mice did not develop the disease '' normally our brains are well equipped to fend off autoimmune reactions that might damage the neurons and impact the central nervous system '' our brains have a limited regenerative capacity which is why they have to protect themselves against the bodys immune reactions which can destroy its cells by wanting to fight the virus creating irreversible damage '' merkler explains '' the brain then sets up barriers that block the passage of t lymphocytes '' he adds however when tox is activated in cd8+ t lymphocytes it renders the cells unable to receive some of the signals that the brain sends to prevent them from attacking healthy neurons so without this `` memo '' the lymphocytes then mount an autoimmune response that targets the brain cells '' this is an encouraging result for understanding the causes of the disease but there is still lots of work to be done to ascertain what really causes multiple sclerosis in humans '' says page so the next step from here for the research team will be to gain a better understanding of toxs role and to see whether it might be involved in triggering other autoimmune diseases apart from ms as well as certain types of cancerscientists have developed a new vaccine that in conjunction with existing therapies can not only treat aggressive melanoma but also prevent its recurrence have researchers finally found the best vaccine against aggressive melanoma researchers from the scripps research institute in san diego ca recently worked with experts from other institutions to develop a vaccine that would be effective against melanoma a type of skin cancer when administered in conjunction with other therapies according to prof dale boger who coled the research with nobel laureate bruce beutler `` this cotherapy produced a complete response a curative response in the treatment of melanoma '' these promising results are reported in a study paper now published in the journal pnas experimental approach fully successful the researchers tested three different therapy options in a mouse model of aggressive melanoma all of the mice received a type of cancer immunotherapy known as antipdl1 but in addition to this they also received different vaccine variants prof boger and team split the mice into three groups one group had the cancer vaccine another group had the vaccine plus a molecule called diprovocim and the third group had the cancer vaccine and another adjuvant a chemical known as alum melanoma immunotherapy for brain metastases doubles survival researchers register fresh successes for immunotherapy against metastatic melanoma read now diprovocim is an adjuvant compound that boosts therapy by reinforcing the immune response this compound is particularly attractive to researchers developing new therapies because it is easy to synthesize and modify the researchers found that the eight mice that received the vaccine plus diprovocim treatment in addition to the antipdl1 therapy had a 100 percent survival rate over 54 days in comparison the rodents that received the immunotherapy plus the vaccine only did not survive those that received antipdl1 plus the vaccine with alum saw a 25 percent survival rate over the same period '' it was exciting to see the vaccine working simultaneously with a cancer immunotherapy like antipdl1 '' prof boger says vaccine also prevents recurrence this however is not the only reason why the researchers were excited in fact the experimental vaccine has another positive effect namely protecting the body against tumor recurrence '' just as a vaccine can train the body to fight off external pathogens this vaccine trains the immune system to go after the tumor '' says prof boger the scientists found that when they tried to reintroduce melanoma tumors in the mice in the second experimental group `` it wouldnt take '' as prof boger puts it `` the animal is already vaccinated against it '' he explains when they conducted more experiments in the laboratory the researchers were able to establish that diprovocim boosts the immune response by `` prompting '' the immune system to produce tumorinfiltrating leukocytes a type of cell that attacks and eliminates cancer tumors prof boger and team also note that the vaccine plus diprovocim can be delivered quite easily since they do not have to be injected directly into a main cancer tumor in order to be effective instead the injection can be delivered intramuscularly it is given in two doses inoculated within 7 days from each other in the future the researchers want to keep experimenting with this vaccine and confirm whether it would be effective when delivered alongside other types of cancer therapy the two leading scientists involved in the recent study manage tollbridge therapeutics a medical research company that holds the patent for diprovocimyou may have taken ibuprofen today be it to ease a headache or alleviate back pain but there might be more to this common medication than pain relief a new paper suggests that a daily dose of ibuprofen could prevent alzheimers disease researchers say that ibuprofen could ward off alzheimers if taken every day led by dr patrick mcgeer who is the ceo of aurin biotech in canada the study describes how ibuprofen could reduce inflammation caused by an alzheimersrelated peptide the paper was recently published in the journal of alzheimers disease alzheimers disease is the most common form of dementia it is estimated that around 57 million adults in the united states are living with the disease this number is predicted to rise to almost 14 million by 2050 the search continues for the exact causes of alzheimers but a sticky protein called betaamyloid is believed to play a role in the disease betaamyloid can clump together and form `` plaques '' in the brain these plaques will interfere with brain cell communication which can lead to memory loss behavioral changes and many other symptoms characteristic of alzheimers disease in a study published last year dr mcgeer and colleagues revealed that a betaamyloid peptide known as amyloidbeta 42 abeta 42 is present in saliva as well as the brain and that levels of this peptide are higher in adults who are at greater risk of alzheimers based on those results the team suggests that a saliva test could be used to predict the risk of alzheimers disease years before symptoms arise '' what weve learned through our research '' reports dr mcgeer `` is that people who are at risk of developing alzheimers exhibit the same elevated abeta 42 levels as people who already have it moreover they exhibit those elevated levels throughout their lifetime so theoretically they could get tested anytime '' a true breakthrough in their paper the researchers claim that ibuprofen a widely used nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug nsaid could prevent the development of alzheimers in people with high levels of abeta 42 dr mcgeer and team point to previous research that they conducted in which they suggested that abeta 42 triggers an inflammatory response can beets tackle alzheimers at its root a new study finds that a beetderived compound could help to treat alzheimers disease read now this response could be reduced by ibuprofen and other nsaids say the researchers which could stop alzheimers in its tracks the team says that identifying the risk of alzheimers through a saliva test would offer people the opportunity to prevent alzheimers development through a daily dose of ibuprofen '' knowing that the prevalence of clinical alzheimers disease commences at age 65 '' explains dr mcgeer `` we recommend that people get tested 10 years before at age 55 when the onset of alzheimers would typically begin '' '' if they exhibit elevated abeta 42 levels then that is the time to begin taking daily ibuprofen to ward off the disease '' dr patrick mcgeer he hails the saliva test as a `` true breakthrough '' because it `` points in a direction where alzheimers disease can eventually be eliminated '' however dr mcgeers claims have been met with some criticism daily ibuprofen recommendation premature dr doug brown chief policy and research officer at the alzheimers society in the united kingdom believes that it is far too soon to be recommending daily ibuprofen for alzheimers prevention '' population studies '' he says `` which gather large amounts of information from medical records from thousands of people have thrown up an idea that taking ibuprofen and other overthecounter antiinflammatories might be linked to a lower risk of dementia '' '' but results of clinical trials with these drugs have been disappointing so far '' '' the researchers suggestion in this paper that taking a daily antiinflammatory drug as soon as a positive result for dementia risk is shown by a saliva test is premature '' adds dr brown `` based on the evidence at the moment '' he also notes the risks of longterm nsaid use including intestinal bleeding and stomach ulcers nsaids may also interact with other medications such as warfarin and produce harmful effects '' we always recommend talking to your doctor before changing your medication '' dr brown saysdogs often hailed as humans best friends have been the topic of many scientific studies looking into how they might boost our wellbeing in this spotlight well explain how your friendly pup can benefit your health across the board learn just how dogs can contribute to our physical and emotional wellbeing according to the american society for the prevention of cruelty to animals aspca an estimated 78 million dogs are owned as pets in the united states it is unclear when dogs were first domesticated but a study published last year claims that at least in europe dogs were tamed 20000–40000 years ago it is likely that humans and dogs have shared a special bond of friendship and mutual support ever since at least the neolithic period but why has this bond been so longlasting of course these cousins of the wolves have historically been great at keeping us and our dwellings safe guarding our houses our cattle and our various material goods throughout history humans have also trained dogs to assist them with hunting or they have bred numerous quirkylooking species for their cuteness or elegance however dogs are also and might have always been truly valued companions famed for their loyalty and seemingly constant willingness to put a smile on their owners faces in this spotlight we outline the research that shows how our dogs make us happier more resilient when facing stress and physically healthier to name but a few ways in which these muchloved quadrupeds support our wellbeing how dogs keep you in good health many studies have suggested that having dogs as pets is associated with better physical health as reviews of the existing literature show these findings persist dogs force their owners to take daily exercise just last year medical news today reported on a study that showed that owning a dog reduces a persons risk of premature death by up to a third also researchers at the university of harvard in cambridge ma suggest that dog owners have a lower risk of heart disease why is that it is difficult to establish a causal relationship between owning a dog and enjoying better health however the benefits may appear thanks to a series of factors related to lifestyle adjustments that people tend to make after they decide to adopt a canine friend why you should talk to your dog learn how talking to your dog helps you bond read now the most prominent such lifestyle factor is physical activity there is no way around it if you own a dog you have to commit to twice daily walks and sometimes even more according to a paper published in the journal of physical activity and health dog owners are more likely to walk for leisure purposes than both nonpet owners and people who own pet cats the results were based on studying a cohort of 41514 participants from california some of whom owned dogs some of whom owned cats and some of whom did not have any pets moreover several recent studies including one from the university of missouri in columbia and another from glasgow caledonian university in the united kingdom found that adults aged 60 and over enjoy better health thanks to the `` enforced '' exercise they get by walking their dogs '' over the course of a week this additional time spent walking may in itself be sufficient to meet world health organization recommendations of at least 150 minutes of moderate to vigorous physical activity '' philippa dall glasgow caledonian university dogs can strengthen our health not just as we grow older but also much much earlier than that before we are even born research published last year suggests that children who were exposed to dogs while still in the womb as their mothers spent time around dogs during pregnancy had a lower risk of developing eczema in early childhood also children exposed to certain bacteria carried by dogs also experienced a reduction of asthma symptoms the researchers noted dogs make people feel good perhaps the most intuitive benefit of sharing your life and home with a canine friend is that dogs give you `` feelgood vibes '' almost instantly dogs are often used as therapy animals because they have a calming effect on people it is really difficult not to cheer up even after a hard days work when you are greeted with often vocal enthusiasm by a friendly dog this researchers explain is due to the effect of the `` love hormone '' oxytocin '' during the last decades '' write the authors of a review that featured in frontiers in psychology `` animal assistance in therapy education and care has greatly increased '' when we interact with dogs our oxytocin levels shoot up since this is the hormone largely responsible for social bonding this hormonal `` love injection '' boosts our psychological wellbeing previous studies analyzed in the review have revealed that dog owners have more positive social interactions and that the presence of canine friends makes people more trustingand also more deserving of trust moreover dogs appear to reduce symptoms of depression and render people more resilient to stress that is why dogs are often used as therapy animals as researcher brian hare of duke university in durham nc noted in an interview for the washington post '' dogs make people feel good and their only job is to help people in stressful situations feel better '' researchers hypothesize that therapy dogs can improve the psychological wellbeing of children going through cancer therapy as well as help individuals diagnosed with posttraumatic stress disorder ptsd deal with disruptive symptoms or even prevent the onset of ptsd episodes what clinical research in dogs can teach us our canine companions could also give us clues and open new avenues of research when it comes to clinical research concerning our own health problems dogs share many diseases with humans by learning more about them we can also learn more about ourselves a study that mnt covered earlier this year reveals that dogs share certain metabolic conditions such as obesity with their human owners thus learning more about dogs gut microbiota and how they are affected by diet could help us understand how best to tackle our own eating habits like humans dogs can also develop some forms of cancer much like us dogs can get brain tumors to similarly destructive effect so learning which genes predispose our canine companions to gliomas may also be translated into cancer research for human patients moreover a contagious form of canine cancer could shed light into how forms of cancer found in humans have come to develop dogs can also experience certain features characteristic of dementia such as impaired problemsolving abilities researchers explain that by understanding how cognitive tasks are affected in these quadrupeds we may become better equipped to solve the riddle of dementia in the case of humans too '' dogs '' notes dr rosalind arden of the london school of economics and political science in the uk `` are one of the few animals that reproduce many of the key features of dementia '' '' so '' she goes on to add `` understanding their cognitive abilities could be valuable in helping us to understand the causes of this disorder in humans and possibly test treatments for it '' dogs are not just incredibly loveable and often very funny friends whose antics fuel the internets store of memes continuously their company also keeps us in good physical shape also their health problems sadly but endearingly often mirror our own most of all however we welcome them into our lives and have done so since time immemorial because they instantly bring us the sort of joy and calm that we would otherwise have to work hard to obtain author dean koontz summarized this perfectly in his memoir of his own muchloved dog '' one of the greatest gifts we receive from dogs is the tenderness they evoke in us by their delight in being with us the reliable sunniness of their disposition the joy they bring to playtime the curiosity with which they embrace each new experience dogs can melt cynicism and sweeten the bitter heart '' we picked linked items based on the quality of products and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you we partner with some of the companies that sell these products which means healthline uk and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a links abovenew research warns that a number of weight loss and workout supplements contain without accurately listing potentially harmful doses of a substance that has been ruled as unsafe a range of dietary supplements contain a substance that may harm you recently scientists looked into whether a range of supplements used as weight loss or workout aids may actually be harmful to those who take them the world antidoping agency wada ban all athletes from taking any drugs or supplements that include higenamine a beta2 agonist that may have toxic effects on the heart yet despite the fact that higenamine is banned by the wada and that it might be harmful to peoples cardiovascular health many dietary supplements still contain it as a substance that naturally occurs in certain plants such as aconite the researchers including john travis a senior research scientist at nsf international in ann arbor mi have revealed not only that higenamine is a widely used supplement ingredient but also that companies that produce such supplements do not properly list the dosage at which this ingredient is used '' were urging competitive and amateur athletes as well as general consumers to think twice before consuming a product that contains higenamine '' says travis '' beyond the doping risk for athletes '' he adds `` some of these products contain extremely high doses of a stimulant with unknown safety and potential cardiovascular risks when consumed '' '' what weve learned from the study is that there is often no way for a consumer to know how much higenamine is actually in the product they are taking '' john travis these findings now appear in the journal clinical toxicology concerning levels of harmful substance the researchers analyzed 24 supplements for weight loss or preworkout that listed higenamine also known as norcoclaurine and demethylcoclaurine and noticed that they featured widely varying and unreliable amounts of this substance the 24 products tested in the study were adrenal pump apidren betastim burnhc defcon1 second strike diablo dyno gnar pump higenamine high definition hypermax iburn2 liporidex max liporidex plus liporush ds2 no vate oxyshred prostunadvanced thermogenic pyroxamine razor8 ritual preworkout supplement stim shot thermovate and uplift probiotics does the evidence match the hype are probiotics really good for you read now worryingly of all the supplements that the researchers looked at only five products mentioned an exact quantity of higenamine however when the supplements were tested travis and his colleagues found that the listed quantities were incorrect actual quantities of higenamine across the range of products included anything from trace amounts to 62 milligrams per serving however based on the label instructions users may actually take up to 110 milligrams of the substance per day which may harm their health in unpredictable ways '' some plants such as ephedra contain stimulants if you take too much of the stimulants found in ephedra it can have lifethreatening consequences '' explains study coauthor dr pieter cohen '' similarly '' he adds `` higenamine is a stimulant found in plants when it comes to higenamine we dont yet know for certain what effect high dosages will have in the human body but a series of preliminary studies suggest that it might have profound effects on the heart and other organs '' according to a study published in the new england journal of medicine in 2015 about 23005 emergency department visits in the united states are related to supplement intake `` while higenamine is considered a legal dietary ingredient when present as a constituent of botanicals our research identified concerning levels of the stimulant and wildly inaccurate labeling and dosage information '' travis explains '' and as a wadaprohibited substance '' he continues `` any amount of higenamine in a dietary supplement should be of concern to the competitive athlete '' the study concludes that to better protect consumers the food and drug administration fda should now finalize their guidelines on supplement ingredients it also warns doctors that the higenamine quantities in many dietary supplements may impact cardiovascular healthblueberries are sometimes branded a `` superfood '' and for good reason they are packed full of antioxidants that offer a wealth of health benefits now a new study has uncovered another use for these little berries helping to treat cancer blueberry extract could help in the fight against cancer say researchers by studying human cervical cancer cell lines a team of researchers discovered that adding blueberry extract to radiation therapy can significantly improve treatment efficacy lead study author dr yujiang fang who works in the school of medicine at the university of missouricolumbia and colleagues recently reported their results in pathology and oncology research according to the american cancer society acs around 12820 new cases of cervical cancer will be diagnosed in the united states this year and more than 4200 women are expected to die from the disease radiation therapy remains a primary treatment for cervical cancer it involves using highenergy radiation to destroy cancer cells '' for some cancers such as late stage cervical cancer radiation is a good treatment option '' says dr fang `` however collateral damage to healthy cells always occurs '' for their study the researchers set out to determine whether or not blueberry extract could be used as a radiosensitizer which is a compound that makes cancer cells more vulnerable to radiation therapy the researchers explain that the blueberry extract does not only make cancer cells more sensitive to radiation but it also reduces the abnormal cell growth that fuels cancer development '' cancer cells avoid death by remodeling themselves '' continues dr fang `` along with reducing cell proliferation the extract also tricks cancer cells into dying so it inhibits the birth and promotes the death of cancer cells '' while further studies are needed the researchers say that their findings indicate that blueberries may be a promising treatment strategy for cervical cancer and other cancer types '' blueberries are very common and found all over the world they are readily accessible and inexpensive as a natural treatment option for boosting the effectiveness of existing therapies i feel they would be enthusiastically accepted '' dr yujiang fangdo you want to improve your mind in 2018 we have compiled the best methods to boost brain power improve memory build new neural connections ignite learning and enhance cognitive function if you would like to improve your mind in 2018 we have five tips to help you humans have brain plasticity or neuroplasticity which is the ability of the brain to change for better or worse at any age this flexibility of the brain plays a significant role in the development or decline of our brains and how our distinct personalities are shaped neural connections can be forged or severed and gray matter can thicken or shrink these changes reflect transformations in our abilities for example learning a new skill can wire new neural pathways in our brains while aging may weaken certain neural pathways that once existed and result in our memories not performing as well as they once did the american heart associationamerican stroke association have recently developed seven steps that aim to help individuals keep their brains healthy from childhood into old age they advise people to get regular exercise eat a healthful diet maintain a healthy weight control cholesterol regulate blood sugar levels manage blood pressure quit smoking in addition to following these guidelines medical news today provide five steps to reach optimal brain health and improve your mind for the year ahead 1 get physically active from childhood through adulthood and into old age physical activity has been shown time and time again to benefit brain health taking a brisk walk before an exam or test could enhance your performance physical activity affects childrens brain structure from an early age which in turn affects their academic performance researchers discovered that children who are physically fit tend to have more gray matter in the frontal subcortical and temporal brain regions as well as in the calcarine cortex these areas are all essential for executive function and motor learning and visual processes exercise has been demonstrated to improve memory and thinking ability among older adults with mild cognitive impairment aerobic exercise in particular was shown to increase brain volume in most gray matter regions including those that support shortterm memory and improve cognitive function scientists have indicated that even short bouts of physical activity may have a positive effect on the brain taking part in 20 minutes of highintensity interval training for 6 weeks has been associated with improvements in highinterference memory which allows us to differentiate between our car and one of the same make model and color for example the research also found that levels of brainderived neurotrophic factor a protein involved in the function growth and survival of brain cells was greater in individuals who experienced greater fitness gains from interval training other research revealed that a onetime 10minute burst of exercise temporarily boosts areas of the brain responsible for focus decisionmaking and problemsolving this suggests that right before a cognitively demanding task such as an exam test or interview performance may be improved by a brisk walk or cycle and if you happen to prefer a more gentle form of exercise practicing 25 minutes of hatha yoga or mindfulness meditation each day has been associated with improvements in the brains executive functions and cognitive abilities as well as the ability to regulate kneejerk emotional responses 2 eat a brainboosting mediterranean diet the mediterranean is the home to sun sea and foods known to have brainboosting properties eating pistachios could improve cognitive processing and learning the mediterranean diet is rich in vegetables fruits whole grains beans nuts seeds and olive oil it also includes moderate amounts of dairy fish and wine while red meat poultry and processed foods are limited research discovered that people who follow a mediterranean diet might have longterm brain protection study participants who consumed a mediterranean diet retained more brain volume over 3 years than those not following the diet eating a mediterranean diet has also been shown to slow down the rate of cognitive decline and is linked with improved brain function in older adults a study that focused on the impact of eating nuts on the brain found that regular nut consumption strengthens brainwave frequencies that are related to cognition learning memory healing and other vital brain functions cognitive ability genes identified this study uncovered 70 new genes related to cognitive ability read now the research team tested almonds cashews pecans pistachios and walnuts although peanuts are actually legumes they were still included in the study some types of nut were found to stimulate specific brain frequencies more than others pistachios seemed to generate the highest gamma wave response while peanuts produced the most significant delta response gamma wave response is tied to information retention learning cognitive processing and perception and delta wave response is linked to natural healing and healthy immunity 3 expand cognitive abilities with training brain training has had mixed results in studies while some research has shown that brain training improves memory and cognitive ability other studies report that there is little evidence to support claims that braintraining programs improve everyday cognitive performance mastering the memory of loci training method could expand your memory capacity recent papers have determined that the type of brain exercise is an important factor in the outcome of braintraining sessions research that was led by radboud university medical center in nijmegen the netherlands found that not only is supersized memory ability trainable but it is also longlasting individuals with typical memory skills used a strategic memory improvement technique known as memory of loci training for 30 minutes each day for 40 days the participants went from recalling around 26 words from a list of 72 to remembering 62 words so the training more than doubled their memory capacity improvements in recall were observed for at least 4 months after training the memory of loci is a mnemonic device that uses familiar objects in a room or landmarks on a journey to visualize memorize and recall an unlimited amount of information in a fixed order 4 learn a new language in addition to brain training another method you can use to give your brain a workout is to learn a new language or several foreign languages learning foreign languages ignites cognitive abilities in infants benefits the aging brain and sharpens the mind learn one or many foreign languages to slow down cognitive decline researchers at the higher school of economics in moscow russia as well as the university of helsinki in finland report that learning foreign languages enhances the elasticity of the brain and its capacity to code information they explain that the more languages a person learns the faster their neural network reacts to process the accumulated data other research which was led by the university of edinburgh in the united kingdom revealed that speaking two or more languages might slow down the cognitive decline associated with aging even if the other languages are learned during adulthood 5 study a musical instrument regardless of whether you study a musical instrument during childhood or adulthood unleashing your inner mozart will have a beneficial effect on your brain studying a musical instrument helps to protect the brain exposure to music at a young age contributes to improved brain development establishes neural networks and stimulates existing tracts in the brain receiving musical training as a child has been demonstrated to prevent the deterioration of speech listening skills in later years and may ward off agerelated cognitive decline a study that was published in the journal of neuroscience uncovered the reason why playing a musical instrument might have a protective effect on the brain the scientists found that playing sounds on an instrument changes brain waves in such a way that rapidly improves listening and hearing skills the altered brain activity illustrates that the brain can rewire itself and compensate for disease or injuries that may get in the way of a persons ability to perform tasks learning a physical task with music has also been shown to increase structural connectivity between the areas of the brain that are responsible for processing sounds and controlling movement adding just a few of these activities to your weekly schedule will enhance your mind and give your brain a boost if you only have time to fit one brainenriching task into your week we recommend getting out for a brisk walk physical activity has no end of benefits for your body and mindcoconut oil has been all the rage for some time endorsed by a number of celebrities as a superfood this tropicalsmelling fat often liberally applied to our skin and scalps is a favorite of many but the question remains is it healthful or not are the health claims that adorn coconut oil based on fact or fiction fat suffered a bad reputation for a long time and we were told to opt for lowfat options instead but the tides turned eventually prompting us to see fats in a new light our lives became simpler we learned how to avoid bad saturated and hydrogenated fats and eat good unsaturated ones to keep our tickers and arteries healthy then the humble coconut came along in 2003 and the waters were once again muddied seen by some as a superfood but recently labeled by the american heart association aha as part of the pool of unhealthful fats the controversy goes on so what are the scientific facts behind the coconut oil hype and what are the latest developments secret ingredient mediumchain fatty acids many of the purported health claims surrounding coconut oil stem from research published in 2003 by mariepierre stonge phd a professor of nutritional medicine at columbia university in new york city ny prof stonge found that in overweight women consumption of mediumchain fatty acids such as those found in coconut oil led to an increase in energy expenditure and fat oxidation compared with women who ate longchain or saturated fatty acids but prof stonge used a specially formulated fat diet in her study not coconut oil and she never claimed that coconut oil was the secret to the results seen in her research the rumor mill had begun to spin and coconut oil became widely hailed as a superfood in fact a 2009 study involving 40 women showed that 30 milliliters of coconut oil consumed daily for a 12week period increased good highdensity lipoprotein hdl levels accompanied by a reduction in waist circumference as more studies have followed the picture became less clearcut aha and who advise to limit consumption despite the number of studies casting coconut oil in a favorable light the aha issued an advisory note on dietary fats and cardiovascular disease in june 2017 recommending that we replace saturated fats with more healthful unsaturated fats this includes coconut oil as the world health organization who state `` unsaturated fats eg found in fish avocado nuts sunflower canola and olive oils are preferable to saturated fats eg found in fatty meat butter palm and coconut oil cream cheese ghee and lard '' the reason saturated fat is bad for our cardiovascular health however there is another twist to this fascinating tale coconut oil for sunburn does it work could sunburn be relieved using coconut oil read now while lowdensity lipoprotein ldl is generally thought of as `` bad '' cholesterol the hdl type is widely accepted as being its `` healthful '' counterpart yet in 2017 we covered three studies that potentially turn what we know about fats and cholesterol on its head the first strudy found that saturated fats may not `` clog '' our arteries after all while the second one uncovered a link between `` good '' hdl and mortality the third study published in november 2017 showed that high levels of hdl may not protect us from heart disease as previously thought what is the latest one of the problems with the controversy surrounding coconut oil is the lack of goodquality largescale human studies but adding to the body of evidence is a new study by the bbcs `` trust me im a doctor '' team together with dr kaytee khaw a professor of clinical gerontology and dr nita gandhi forouhi a professor of population health and nutrition both at the university of cambridge in the united kingdom the team compared the effects of coconut oil olive oil and butter in 94 human volunteers each study participant was asked to consume 50 grams of one of these fats daily for 4 weeks the results came as a surprise those who consumed coconut oil saw a 15 percent increase in hdl levels while this number only stood at 5 percent for olive oil which is accepted as being good for our cardiovascular system if we are working on the premise that hdl is good then these results speak in favor of coconut oil it is important to note however that the results of this study have not been peerreviewed and must be treated as preliminary coconut oil the verdict so is coconut oil healthful or not as with many research areas there is no straightforward answer if you are looking to lose weight its worth bearing in mind that coconut oil is very high in saturated fat and one tablespoon contains 120 calories if its cardiovascular health that you are after the official party line drawn by the aha and who still puts coconut oil on the list of fats to limit but who knows maybe the tables will turn and new guidelines will emerge in the meantime coconut oil can be part of a healthful balanced diet if consumed in moderation however its worth looking out for coconut oil in packaged foods especially partially hydrogenated coconut oil this is a source of trans fats which the food and drug administration fda say increase the risk of heart diseasegroundbreaking research shows for the first time how the most wellknown genetic risk factor for alzheimers disease causes signs in human brain cells also the scientists managed to correct the gene and erase its harmful effects scientists fix the faulty gene that most likely causes alzheimers the complex role of the apolipoprotein apoe gene in the development of alzheimers has been studied extensively for instance researchers know that having one copy of the apoe4 gene variant raises the risk of alzheimers by two to three times and having two copies of this genetic variant puts people at a 12fold higher risk normally apoes role is to provide instructions for creating the protein of the same name in combination with fats apoe creates lipoproteins which help to transport and regulate levels of cholesterol throughout our bloodstream however the e4 version of the gene seems to be particularly damaging to the brain with several studies showing that this genetic variant increases the risk of toxic amyloid beta and tau buildup but why is that what makes the e4 variant of this gene so much more harmful than other variants researchers at the gladstone institutes in san francisco ca wanted to find out their findings have just been published in the journal nature medicine apoe4 studied in human cells for first time more specifically the researchers wanted to locate and understand the fine yet crucial difference between the e3 and e4 variants that makes the apoe4 gene so devastating is it a case the researchers wondered of the e4 variant making apoe3 lose some of its functions or is it the case that more apoe4 has toxic effects alzheimers this antibody may halt brain injury apoetargeting antibodies halved the amount of toxic plaques in mices brains read now lead investigator dr yadong huang a professor of neurology and pathology at the university of california san francisco explains the importance of this question '' its fundamentally important '' he says `` to address this question because it changes how you treat the problem if the damage is caused due to the loss of a proteins function you would want to increase protein levels to supplement those functions '' '' but if the accumulation of a protein leads to a toxic function you want to lower production of the protein to block its detrimental effect '' to find out the researchers modeled the disease in human cells examining the effect of apoe4 on human brain cells for the first time dr huang explains why changing the disease model was in itself a huge step for alzheimers research '' many drugs '' he explains `` work beautifully in a mouse model but so far theyve all failed in clinical trials one concern within the field has been how poorly these mouse models really mimic human disease '' of mice and humans study finds differences applying stem cell technology to skin cells from people with alzheimers who had two copies of the apoe4 gene dr huang and his team created neurons the researchers also created brain cells using skin cells from people who didnt have alzheimers and had two copies of the apoe3 gene the scientists found that in human brain cells the apoe4 protein has a `` pathogenic conformation '' meaning that it has an abnormal form that prevents it from functioning properly leading to a series of diseasecausing problems namely `` apoe4expressing neurons had higher levels of tau phosphorylation '' the authors write which was `` unrelated to their increased production of amyloidbeta peptides and they displayed gabaergic neuron degeneration '' importantly they also found that `` apoe4 increased amyloidbeta production in human but not in mouse neurons '' '' theres an important species difference in the effect of apoe4 on amyloid beta '' explains first study author chengzhong wang '' increased amyloid beta production is not seen in mouse neurons and could potentially explain some of the discrepancies between mice and humans regarding drug efficacy this will be very important information for future drug development '' chengzhong wang correcting the faulty gene next dr huang and team wanted to see whether it was the loss of apoe3 or the accumulation of apoe4 that caused the disease so they compared neurons that did not produce either the e3 or the e4 variant of the protein with cells that had apoe4 added to them the former continued to behave normally while adding apoe4 led to alzheimerslike pathologies this confirmed the fact that it is the presence of the apoe4 that causes the disease as a final step dr huang and his team looked for ways in which to fix the faulty gene to this end they applied a previously developed apoe4 `` structure corrector '' the socalled structure corrector has been shown in previous research led by the same dr huang to change the structure of apoe4 so that it looks and behaves more like the inoffensive apoe3 applying this compound to human apoe4 neurons corrected the defects thereby eliminating signs of the disease restoring normal cell function and helping the cells to live longer the researchers conclude '' treatment of apoe4expressing neurons with a smallmolecule structure corrector ameliorated the detrimental effects thus showing that correcting the pathogenic conformation of apoe4 is a viable therapeutic approach for apoe4related alzheimers disease ''you wake up in the middle of the night convinced that an evil figure is lying in wait you attempt to move but your body just will not budge you try to scream but nothing comes out the monster draws closer it may sound like a horror movie scene but this is the real deal youre experiencing sleep paralysis sleep paralysis is like a waking nightmare and the underlying causes for this condition remain unclear this terrifying and mysterious sleep disorder or parasomnia has been experienced by people possibly since the dawn of humankind and it may have given rise to numerous ghost stories and mysterious accounts involving `` things that go bump in the night '' this most unsettling experience was first clearly documented in a medical treatise in the 17th century by dutch physician isbrand van diembroeck who wrote about the case of a woman `` 50 years of age in good plight health strong '' yet who complained of mysterious experiences at night '' when she was composing her self to sleep '' explains van diembroeck `` sometimes she believed the devil lay upon her and held her down sometimes that she was choked by a great dog or thief lying upon her breast so that she could hardly speak or breathe and when she endeavored to throw off the burden she was not able to stir her members '' what the woman in van dimbroecks account likely experienced was a condition that has come to be known as `` sleep paralysis '' researchers define it as `` a common generally benign parasomnia characterized by brief episodes of inability to move or speak combined with waking consciousness '' sleep paralysis and hallucinations the reason why sleep paralysis is so scary is not just because you will suddenly become alert but realize that you are in fact unable to move a muscle or utter a sound but also because this experience is often as in the case above accompanied by terrifying hallucinations these as specialized literature has now ascertained typically fall into three distinct categories a sensed presence or intruder hallucinations in which the person feels the presence of an evil threatening individual incubus hallucinations in which the person might feel someone or something pressing down uncomfortably even painfully on their chest or abdomen or trying to choke them vestibularmotor hallucinations during which the individual thinks that they are floating flying or moving these may also sometimes include outofbody experiences in which a person thinks that their spirit or mind has left their body and is moving and observing events from above among the types of dreamlike hallucinations listed above the first type a sensed presence is one of the most commonly experienced by people with sleep paralysis as for the time of sleep at which sleep paralysis with or without hallucinations normally takes place again there is no single answer according to a study that was published in the journal of sleep research sleep paralysis typically happens soon after falling asleep or hypnagogic episodes at some point during the course of sleep or hypnomesic episodes or a little before the persons usual time of awakening or hypnopompic episodes the authors of that study note that the most common instances of sleep paralysis are hypnomesic and that they usually take place after 1–3 hours from falling asleep a strange shadowy man in fact these visions and sensations can seem so realistic to many people that they may think that they are having a paranormal experience or even being subjected to strange tests and rituals the most common hallucination linked to sleep paralysis is the sensed presence of a sinister figure '' witness accounts '' of such hallucinations can be truly unsettling and a number of longtime experients such as louid proud in his book dark intrusions have offered detailed accounts of years of uncanny nightly encounters one person who told me about his nightmarish hallucinations said he felt as if `` someone knelt on his chest so that it felt as if he was being choked out '' another person spoke of a nighttime assailant that takes pleasure in tormenting her in myriad ways '' when sleep paralysis strikes i get both visual and auditory hallucinations which most often involve a strange shadowy man coming up my stairs and into my bedroom occasionally hell prod or tickle me '' often she told me this sinister figure even `` coopts '' her partner in his mischief '' sometimes '' she says `` ill even hallucinate my partner lying next to me and laughing maliciously at me or siding with the shadowy figure in annoying me this is very frustrating since all i want him to do is help me '' given the intensity of these hallucinatory experiences it may come as no surprise that researchers have repeatedly argued that hallucinations linked with sleep paralysis can be held responsible for many reports of magical events sightings of ghouls and demons and alien abductions some happy exceptions although usually people with sleep paralysis report experiencing terrifying hallucinations a happy few actually point to a state of bliss that makes them look forward to these episodes a study that was conducted by james allan cheyne from the university of waterloo in ontario canada suggests that the people who most often describe experiencing positive feelings and sensations during an episode of sleep paralysis are those who are prone to vestibularmotor hallucinations '' these hallucinations were found to involve feelings of floating and outofbody experiences which are associated with feelings of bliss rather than fear '' james allan cheyne '' in contrast to the otheroriented nature of the intruder and incubus hallucinations '' he adds `` these experiences are very much focused on the experients own person '' sometimes cheyne continues feelings of bliss during sleep paralysis are derived from pleasant erotic sensations that arise from vestibularmotor hallucinations what is the underlying mechanism so what happens in the body during an episode of sleep paralysis essentially during the dream phase of sleep known as the rapid eye movement rem phase our skeletal muscles are paralyzed the reasons behind this are not fully understood though researchers have been making progress in uncovering the mechanisms attached to this process insomnia why your brain may sleep without even knowing it people who have insomnia may actually fall asleep for short stretches of time without realizing it how come they dont know it happens read now one popular theory posits that this temporary state of paralysis is meant to prevent us from hurting ourselves perhaps in automatic response to some violent dream during sleep paralysis paradoxically our brains or parts of our brains become awake and conscious but the rest of the body is still immobilized at the same time during sleep paralysis many people experience dream visions and sensations as though they were real hence the hallucinations and the fact that they are in fact partly awake and conscious blurs the line between reality and dreams who is at risk of sleep paralysis sleep paralysis is more common than we may think a 2016 study declares that it is `` surprisingly common '' but that `` determining accurate prevalence rates is complicated '' because researchers and study participants alike have different understandings of what counts as sleep paralysis although a fair amount of research has been conducted in this respect it remais unclear as to who is most at risk of sleep paralysis a recent review of the available data however suggests that 76 percent of the population have experienced at least one episode throughout their lives that said the numbers may be even higher what causes sleep paralysis and what the main risks are for experiencing such an episode remain largely mysterious sleep paralysis is a common symptom of the neurological disorder `` narcolepsy '' which is characterized by uncontrollable sleepiness throughout the waking day but many people who experience sleep paralysis do so independently of neurological conditions and to distinguish between narcolepsyrelated episodes and independently occurring sleep paralysis specialists usually refer to the latter as `` isolated sleep paralysis '' recurrent isolated sleep paralysis often starts in adolescence and around 283 percent of students apparently experience it moreover people with poor `` sleep hygiene '' for instance those who sleep too much or too little may also be more likely to experience sleep paralysis the authors of a systematic review published in sleep medicine reviews note '' specifically excessively short fewer than 6 hours or long over 9 hours sleep duration and napping especially long naps over 2 hours were associated with increased odds of sleep paralysis '' '' long selfreported sleep latency how long it takes to fall asleep over 30 minutes and difficulty initiating sleep were related to an increased likelihood of reporting sleep paralysis '' they add are mental health issues to blame given the frightening nature of the most of the hallucinations associated with sleep paralysis many have wondered whether individuals experiencing mental health issues such as depression or anxiety are more susceptible to these experiences the results of existing research however are mixed some have argued that individuals who have experienced abuse in early life whether or not they remember it may be more exposed to sleep paralysis according to the study that was published in sleep medicine reviews `` levels of waking state dissociative experiences involving depersonalisation derealisation and amnesia were found to be related to both sleep paralysis frequency and the frequencyintensity of all three hallucination types '' but links to other neurological and psychiatric disorders are more uncertain the authors of a study that was published in the journal consciousness and cognition note that previous research has tried to make a case that bipolar disorder posttraumatic stress disorder depression panic disorder and generalized anxiety disorder to name but a few may play a role in sleep paralysis however they report that their analysis of the available data has revealed `` no general relationship between isolated sleep paralysis and major psychopathology '' instead they decided to focus on the most common `` symptom '' of sleep paralysis that is sensed presence hallucinations that induce a feeling of fear and explained that there may be a link between it and what they call `` passive social imagery '' passive social imagery refers to the experience of individuals who are prone to being more socially anxious and to imagining themselves in embarrassing or distressing social situations as the passive victim on the receiving end of abuse these individuals the researchers suggest appear to be more at risk of experiencing distress due to sensed presence hallucinations what can you do to prevent it prevention and coping strategies for sleep paralysis are unfortunately mostly anecdotal but there are some methods that seem to have been repeatedly validated by many individuals who say that they usually or often work for them these include trying not to fall asleep on on your back since studies have associated episodes of sleep paralysis with lying on ones back when going to sleep trying to ensure on a regular basis that your sleep will not be disrupted since repeatedly waking up during the night has been flagged up as a potential risk factor avoiding overuse of stimulants such as tobacco and alcohol coffee surprisingly has not been deemed risky in this context though the evidence that these affect the chances of experiencing sleep paralysis is mixed learning meditation and muscle relaxation techniques may help you to better cope with the experience persisting in the attempt `` to move extremities '' such as fingers or toes during sleep paralysis also seems to help disrupt the experience finally if you regularly experience sleep paralysis with `` sensed presence '' and you think that this may be related to other experiences of anxiety in your daytoday life then it may be worth considering cognitive behavioral therapy according to the authors of the consciousness and cognition study there is a distinct `` possibility that frightening isolated sleep paralysis sensed presence experiences may contribute to maintenance of an individuals negative social imagery biases '' if that is the case they argue `` cognitive behavioral treatment of these experiences could help to alleviate the more general social imagery dysfunction '' which may improve the overall situation we picked linked items based on the quality of products and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you we partner with some of the companies that sell these products which means healthline uk and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a links aboveboth swine flu and bird flu created a stir in recent years now a new threat may be on the horizon a new study demonstrates that the influenza virus can jump from pigs to canines canine influenza viruses are growing in number usually influenza pandemics are sparked when a virus jumps from birds to pigs and then eventually to humans influenza viruses in an animal population where there are many viral strains in one place can mix together to create new forms when new strains jump to humans our immune systems which have no experience of these unknown pathogens fail to protect us for instance the 2009 h1n1 pandemic was caused by a virus that began in birds then it moved into pigs where it picked up new genes from flu viruses already present in swine before leaping into humans generally birds and swine are considered the most dangerous melting pots for the influenza virus viruses in dogs and horses seem to have much less viral genetic diversity influenza and dogs although much less common 15 years ago researchers documented an influenza virus that had entered a horse before jumping into a canine this became the first circulating canine influenza virus then just 5 years ago a canine influenza virus of avian origin was discovered in farmed dogs in china a new study published this week in the journal mbio moves the story on another step how to avoid catching the flu although complete immunity cant be guaranteed here are some tips that might protect you from getting sick read now the scientists who are based at the center for research on influenza pathogenesis icahn school of medicine at mount sinai in new york city ny looked in detail at the genomes of 16 influenza viruses from dogs in southern chinas guangxi autonomous region the viruses were detected in dogs that attended veterinary clinics due to respiratory problems the authors explain their findings and their importance '' what we have found is another set of viruses that come from swine that are originally avian in origin and now they are jumping into dogs and have been reassorted with other viruses in dogs '' '' we now have h1n1 h3n2 and h3n8 in dogs they are starting to interact with each other this is very reminiscent of what happened in swine 10 years before the h1n1 pandemic '' next steps and new concerns this new virus that the researchers found is h1n1 but it is distinct from the strain that caused the previous epidemic to the next step will be to test the virus on human serum '' if there is a lot of immunity against these viruses '' says investigator dr adolfo garcíasastre `` they will represent less of a risk but we now have one more host in which influenza virus is starting to have a diverse genotypic and phenotypic characteristics creating diversity in a host which is in very close contact to humans '' it may be that humans already have protection against this particular strain but that does not take the concern away entirely '' the diversity in dogs has increased so much now that the type of combinations of viruses that can be created in dogs represent potential risk for a virus to jump to a dog into a human '' dr adolfo garcíasastre in the united states whenever avian flu is detected in a population of birds they are culled this would be an unpopular solution if the virus was to infect domestic dogs dr garcíasastre says `` there are attempts to restrict influenza virus in pigs through vaccination and one could consider vaccination for dogs '' hopefully interventions of that nature wont be necessary but only time will tell whether dog flu could become a serious reason for concernscientists in the united kingdom and china find that a new drug for type 2 diabetes may protect the brain from damage caused by alzheimers disease after testing it in mice could a diabetes drug help to treat alzheimers disease in a new paper published in the journal brain research the researchers explain how the `` tripleaction '' drug resulted in a significant reversal of memory loss in mice that were genetically engineered to develop humanlike alzheimers disease the new drug `` holds clear promise of being developed into a new treatment for chronic neurodegenerative disorders such as alzheimers disease '' says study leader christian hölscher a professor in the faculty of health and medicine at lancaster university in the uk alzheimers is a brainwasting disease that accounts for 50–75 percent of cases of dementia which is a condition wherein people gradually lose their ability to think remember make decisions hold a conversation and look after themselves as the disease progresses the brain undergoes biological and chemical changes and particular areas shrink as nerve cells or neurons die the exact causes of alzheimers are currently unknown but microscopic examinations of affected brain tissue have revealed two hallmarks abnormal accumulations of protein segments known as `` plaques '' and `` tangles '' current treatments make no real difference the number of people with alzheimers disease is rising rapidly as the population ages in 2015 there were an estimated 468 million people worldwide living with dementia and this number is expected to reach more than 130 million in 2050 in the united states where alzheimers is currently the sixth leading cause of death there are an estimated 5 million people living with alzheimers disease this is expected to rise to 16 million by 2050 accompanied by a significant rise in costs to the us the cost of alzheimers and other causes of dementia in 2017 was estimated to be $ 259 billion and is expected to rise to $ 11 trillion by 2050 at present there is no cure for alzheimers disease and there are also no treatments that make a significant difference to the symptoms drug raises activity of three growth factors type 2 diabetes is a disease that results from insulin resistance a condition in which cells become less sensitive to insulin and therefore less able to take in glucose from the bloodstream to use as energy the pancreas makes more insulin to compensate but eventually it will be unable to keep up and blood glucose levels will rise leading to prediabetes diabetes and other health problems could an existing oxygen therapy treat alzheimers learn how hyperbaric oxygen therapy might alleviate some physical and behavioral symptoms of alzheimers read now the drug that prof hölscher and his group tested in the new study is a `` triple receptor agonist '' that activates the proteins that allow signals from three growth factors called glucagonlike peptide1 glucosedependent insulinotropic polypeptide and glucagon to enter cells previous studies have revealed that type 2 diabetes is a risk factor for alzheimers and problems with growth factor signaling have been detected in the brains of people with the disease the new study is the first to show that a triple receptor agonist may protect the brain from the progressive brain damage that occurs in alzheimers disease consistent neuroprotective effects the researchers tested the drug on aged appps1 mice whose brains were in the advanced stages of degeneration appps1 mice are engineered `` transgenic mice '' that carry versions of human genes that are linked to an inherited form of alzheimers in a maze learning test the treated mice showed improved memory formation also examination of their brain tissue showed a reduction in amyloid plaques inflammation and oxidative stress treated mice showed higher rates of new nerve cell generation and celltocell connections and increased levels of a growth factor called brainderived neurotrophic factor which protects nerve cells '' these very promising outcomes '' says prof hölscher `` demonstrate the efficacy of these novel multiplereceptor drugs that originally were developed to treat type 2 diabetes but have shown consistent neuroprotective effects in several studies '' he notes that clinical studies that used an older version of the same type of drug have already shown `` very promising results in people with alzheimers disease or with mood disorders '' the researchers believe that their findings point to a `` promising '' direction in which to look for new treatments for alzheimers disease '' here we show that a novel triple receptor drug shows promise as a potential treatment for alzheimers but further doseresponse tests and direct comparisons with other drugs have to be conducted in order to evaluate if this new drug is superior to previous ones '' prof christian hölscheranhedonia or the inability to feel pleasure during pleasurable activities occurs as a part of a number of conditions it is also considered a central feature of depression in this spotlight feature we explore whats happening in the brain anhedonia accompanies a range of neuropsychiatric conditions most people will at some point in their life lose interest in things that used to excite them anhedonia however takes this loss to its limits it becomes impossible to draw enjoyment from things that once elicited excitement such as music sex food and conversation aside from major depressive disorder it can occur as part of other conditions including schizophrenia psychosis and parkinsons disease as well as anorexia nervosa and substance abuse disorders it may even play a part in an individuals desire to indulge in risky behaviors such as skydiving over recent years anhedonia has received increased attention part of the reason for this is that it predicts how well someone with depression will respond to treatment common antidepressants tend to work less well for people who have depression with anhedonia than for those who have depression without anhedonia because treating depression is so challenging any additional insight is welcome there is evidence to suggest that the presence of anhedonia increases the risk of committing suicide so if the link is proven recognizing and dealing with anhedonia could save lives what does anhedonia feel like to gain a better understanding of what anhedonia feels like the following is an excerpt from a firsthand account '' for the past 7 years i have had the smallest flickering of emotions what i feel on a daily basis is practically nil i have no desires to truly speak of as nothing i do is rewarding or satisfying this is the core of my anhedonia a symptom of major depression '' '' essentially i gain nothing from my daily life my world is cold and as such it makes life seem the same way everything i look at everything i do looks and feels the same '' whats happening in the brain as with the investigation of any emotional response the story is not a simple one the brains circuitry is dense convoluted and incredibly busy anhedonia is not simply a reduced appreciation of the taste of chocolate the underlying reward mechanisms are impaired this might involve alterations in levels of interest motivation anticipation expectation and effort prediction all of which are complex in their own right and all of which are processed by different but overlapping neural circuits anhedonia and reward there is evidence that many individuals with anhedonia can experience pleasure in a similar way to the rest of the population its just that there is something amiss as far as motivation anticipation and reward are concerned anhedonia seems to interfere with reward mechanisms for people with anhedonia the reward process has come unhinged finding which part of this process has become unshackled is a difficult job in order to understand the interplay between the different aspects of pleasure i will relay an example if we experience something and enjoy it eating a new type of candy for instance we might want to do it again however if the candy costs $ 1000 per piece we might not bother or similarly if it is known to cause cancer we will probably give it a miss if the candy is free and safe however we will tuck in if we are required to walk to the next room to get a piece we will probably make the effort but if it is stationed half a mile away we might pause for thought and if its in the next town we will forgo the pleasure but even if the candy is healthful placed on the table next to us and free of charge we might take a piece even if we have just eaten a threecourse meal desire motivation and the pleasure we derive from things are fluid although this particular example is simplistic it shows how our brains make computations about risks rewards and payoffs using multiple brain regions often without our conscious input with this in mind where should we start well for many years a part of the basal ganglia called the nucleus accumbens has been referred to as the `` pleasure center '' unsurprisingly it is implicated in anhedonia recent studies have shown that other brain areas are also involved including the prefrontal cortex which is involved in planning and personality expression the amygdala which processes emotions and is involved in decisionmaking the striatum which is the area that houses the nucleus accumbens implicated in the reward system the insula which is thought to be important in consciousness and selfawareness the prefrontal cortex seems important in highlevel processing of rewards including costbenefit analysis and decisionmaking its connections to the ventral striatum seem to be particularly important in motivation and therefore anhedonia the role of neurotransmitters neurotransmitter imbalances have also been investigated in relation to anhedonia dopamine is of particular interest due to its involvement in reward pathways as well as the fact that it is expressed in high quantities in the nucleus accumbens in fact reduced dopamine expression in the ventral striatum of depressed people was found to correlate well with anhedonia severity but not depressive symptoms overall dopamines relationship with anhedonia and reward is a complex one though reduced dopamine levels in different parts of the brain can have different effects linking depression insomnia and the brains reward center a study finds that increased activity in a brain region responsible for rewardrelated functions reduces the risk of depression related to sleep problems read now as an example increased dopamine in the insula has the opposite effect on effortbased decisionmaking to increased dopamine in the ventral striatum so dopamine is unlikely to tell the whole story gaba an inhibitory neurotransmitter glutamate an excitatory neurotransmitter serotonin and opioids may also play their part for instance people with depression who also have pronounced anhedonia seem to have reduced gaba levels and depressed people with reduced opioid activity experience less pleasure during positive interactions a possible role for inflammation depression and inflammation have been linked for some time scientists have measured increased levels of inflammatory compounds in people with depression these chemical hallmarks include cytokines and creactive proteins cytokines shown here may be involved in anhedonia a study of people with depression published in the journal molecular psychiatry in 2015 found that increased levels of creactive protein were associated with reduced connectivity between the ventral striatum and ventromedial prefrontal cortex which is important in motivation and increased anhedonia other studies have produced similar findings so inflammation appears to be involved in both depression and anhedonia although a link between anhedonia and inflammation seems perhaps unexpected it makes sense when one peels back the layers cytokines can influence neurotransmitter metabolism and brain activity also cytokines promote socalled sickness behavior including lethargy malaise loss of appetite sleepiness and sensitivity to pain all of which have parallels in depression and people who undergo cytokine treatment for cancer often report depressive symptoms although we do not have a full understanding of the origins of anhedonia the research to date tells us that it is multifaceted and quite possibly different from person to person treating anhedonia at present there are no treatments aimed at anhedonia it is commonly treated alongside the condition that it is part of for instance selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors are often prescribed for individuals with depression there is a growing body of evidence that standard depression treatments do little for anhedonia and worse still may add to the problem by causing emotional blunting sexual anhedonia and anorgasmia or the inability to orgasm this negative interaction might be because serotonin inhibits dopamine release in certain brain regions potentially interfering with the reward motivation and pleasure circuitry on a positive note there has been recent interest in the anesthetic ketamine as a potential antianhedonic medication ketamine has shown promise as a treatment for depression quickly reducing symptoms in both major depressive disorder and bipolar disorder a study that was published in the journal nature in 2014 specifically set out to see whether it could also have an effect on anhedonia trials in rodents had already generated interesting results but this was the first time that ketamine had been investigated in humans specifically the study looked at treatmentresistant bipolar disorder the authors concluded that `` ketamine rapidly reduced the levels of anhedonia '' in fact the reduction occurred within 40 minutes and lasted up to 14 days following a single injection interestingly the reduction occurred without a similar reduction in depressive symptoms ketamine blocks nmethyldaspartate receptors thereby preventing them from being activated by glutamate this infers that glutamate an excitatory neurotransmitter might play a role in anhedonia there is still a long way to go before the many strands of anhedonia are fully understood however our knowledge is slowly growing and with time there is hope of a solution to this highly intrusive and debilitating maladyresearchers have discovered a mechanism through which toxic protein clusters develop in the brain in parkinsons disease it may be treatable with drugs approved for another disease the buildup of toxic proteins in parkinsons disease could be halted with an already approved drug in a paper published in the journal neuron the scientists describe how they discovered that increasing a fatty substance or lipid called glucosylceramide causes a buildup of toxic clusters of alphasynuclein protein inside dopamineproducing brain cells the team also revealed that treatment with an already approved glucosylceramide synthase inhibitor a drug that reduces production of the lipid reduced the toxic protein clusters which are a hallmark of parkinsons disease '' some companies '' says senior study author joseph mazzulli an assistant professor of neurology at northwestern university feinberg school of medicine in chicago il `` have been using synthase inhibitors to reduce the synthesis of the lipid and we used a similar compound on patientderived neurons in our study '' '' we were able to show it reduced toxic alphasynuclein aggregation directly within neurons derived from parkinsons patients '' he adds parkinsons arises from dopamine cell death parkinsons disease is a progressive condition that arises from the death of cells in a brain region known as the substantia nigra the cells produce a chemical messenger called dopamine that is important for regulating movement the main symptoms of parkinsons disease are tremors slowness of movement and stiffness as well as reduced balance and coordination other symptoms include emotional changes sleep disruption depression difficulty speaking problems with swallowing and chewing and constipation parkinsons mostly strikes after the age of 60 although a small number of cases are diagnosed in those under the age of 50 as the symptoms worsen it gets harder to cope with everyday tasks and lead an independent life there are more than 10 million people living with parkinsons worldwide including around 1 million in the united states where approximately 60000 cases are diagnosed every year alone while there is as yet no cure for parkinsons disease there are drugs and other treatments that offer symptom relief for many patients gba1 mutations and parkinsons disease in the study paper prof mazzulli and team explain that a strong risk factor for the development of toxic alphasynuclein clusters in parkinsons is mutations in the glucocerebrosidase gba1 gene the gene produces a protein that is important for the correct functioning of lysosomes which are compartments inside cells that break down and clear away glucosylceramide and other lipids parkinsons disease how toxic proteins damage healthy brain cells a study reveals for the first time how toxic clumps of alphasynuclein drill holes in healthy brain cells to disrupt their function read now those with one mutated copy of gba1 have higherthannormal levels of the glucosylceramide and have a greater risk of developing parkinsons disease having two mutated copies of the gene one from each parent can lead to gauchers disease which is a rare disorder wherein lysosomes fail and fatty compounds build up in the body however although it is known that gba1 mutations are linked perhaps through the disruption of glucosylceramide clearance to the development of toxic alphasynuclein clusters what has not been clear until the new study is the mechanism behind it mutated gba1 may not be necessary to investigate the scientists tested the effects of a drug that raises levels of glucosylceramide in dopamineproducing neurons grown from patientderived stem cells the cells did not have mutated forms of the gba1 gene they discovered that even without the mutated gene there was a significant buildup of toxic alphasynuclein clusters in the neurons prof mazzulli suggests that this indicates that the conversion of normal alphasynuclein into its toxic form did not necessarily depend on `` the presence of the mutated gba1 protein but more importantly the decreased activity and accumulation of glucosylceramide '' complex alphasynuclein and toxic clusters on closer investigation of the conversion of alphasynuclein from its normal to toxic form the team discovered that it was not just the simple form of alphasynuclein as previously thought that converted into a toxic cluster instead glucosylceramide was directly converting the complex form of alphasynuclein into toxic clusters `` we were surprised to find that toxic aggregation occurred by direct conversion of the large alphasynuclein complex '' prof mazzulli explains '' we thought '' he continues `` that the complex would have to first disassemble before forming toxic aggregates but thats not what our data indicated '' he says that drugs devised for the treatment of gauchers disease might be one way to target this mechanism these findings also offer a way to measure how well drugs might perform in trials while the goal of parkinsons treatment is to reduce alphasynuclein clusters measuring levels of the toxic protein in living patients is not straightforward '' its far easier to measure the effects of therapeutics that alter glucosylceramide in patients since the lipid can be directly measured from easily accessible fluids such as blood or cerebral spinal fluid '' prof joseph mazzullia new study now published in the journal psychotherapy and psychosomatics has found a link between a common class of stomach drugs called proton pump inhibitors and depression the researchers suggest that the pills might lead to major depressive disorder by disrupting the guts bacteria common stomach drugs may trigger depression by disrupting the gutbrain axis suggests new research more and more studies are now pointing to the numerous ways in which our gut bacteria may influence both our mental and emotional wellbeing for instance researchers have found that germfree mice that had been deprived of beneficial gut bacteria displayed symptoms of anxiety depression and cognitive impairment since the bacteria in our gut can alter the function of our brain by producing certain hormones or neurotransmitters and emotional responses can in turn affect our gut bacteria it should come as no surprise that some studies have found a link between posttraumatic stress disorder and certain strains of bacteria other studies have not only pinpointed specific bacteria whose absence can trigger symptoms of depression in rodents but they have also shown that supplementing said bacteria can reverse signs of depression now an observational study suggests that proton pump inhibitors which are a class of drugs typically prescribed to treat acidrelated stomach conditions such as gastroesophageal reflux disease increase the risk of developing major depressive disorder this is the leading cause of disability both in the united states and worldwide the first author of the new study is weisheng huang from the department of psychiatry at the taipei veterans general hospital in taiwan stomach acid pills may disrupt gutbrain axis huang and team examined data on 2366 individuals who had been taking proton pump inhibitors and went on to develop depression and compared them with 9464 people who also took the drugs but did not develop depression the latter group of participants was `` matched for age sex enrollment time end point time and followup period '' antidepressants do they really work we take a critical look at the effectiveness of these commonly prescribed drugs read now the researchers applied logistic regression analysis and adjusted for various demographic factors as well as for psychiatric comorbidities such as anxiety and substance abuse disorders the study revealed that compared with those who did not develop major depressive disorder `` patients with major depression had a greater prevalence of higher cumulative defined daily dose '' of proton pump inhibitors specifically the risk of clinical depression increased for those who took the drugs pantoprazole lansoprazole and rabeprazole while in those who used omeprazole and esomeprazole `` only a trend significance was noted '' '' to our knowledge '' write the study authors `` this was the first study to investigate the association between proton pump inhibitor exposure and the risk of major depression '' while the mechanisms behind such an association remain mysterious the authors venture a couple of possible explanations the drugs might raise depression risk by dysregulating the gutbrain axis they suggest or by preventing the organism from properly absorbing nutrients after the use of stomach drugs still the researchers caution that physicians should continue to prescribe the drugs as and when needed bearing in mind the range of side effects that these drugs may have which include pneumonia bone fracture and gastrointestinal infections huang and team recommend that future studies investigate the pathophysiology behind the association they foundcolorectal cancer is quite common especially among the aging population an important risk factor for colorectal cancer is diet and dietary choices are also vital during and after treatment in this spotlight we give you an overview of which diets are best and which are best avoided what does a good diet for preventing colorectal cancer and for aiding cancer treatment look like colorectal cancer is a type of cancer that affects a persons rectum colon or both this is also known as the large intestine according to the american cancer society acs 2018 could bring around 97220 new diagnoses of colon cancer and 43030 new cases of rectal cancer to the united states this type of cancer is more likely to appear in older individuals but there are many other risk factors associated with its emergence such as genetic and lifestyle factors of the latter one of the most cited risk factors is diet referring specifically to poor dietary habits that often also lead to obesity below we look at which foods and nutrients have been said to raise the risk of colorectal cancer and which types of diet have been deemed helpful in its prevention we also cover the diets most likely to keep the body resilient during and after treatment for this type of cancer prevention what to avoid numerous studies have indicated that a diet too rich in red meat is associated with a heightened risk of colorectal cancer `` red meat '' is defined by the world health organization who as `` all mammalian muscle meat including beef veal pork lamb mutton horse and goat '' eating a lot of red meat is known to significantly increase the risk of colorectal cancer a review of the evidence supporting this link notes that `` consumption of red meat might be related directly to the incidence of colorectal cancer or indirectly because a diet high in meat tends to be low in vegetables fruit and fiber '' a study of north italian populations showed that individuals who eat red meat alongside eggs cheese and other fatty foods as well as refined starches on a frequent basis had an almost twice higher risk of developing rectal or colon cancer than their peers who favored a plantbased diet more recent research also revealed that `` a daily increase of 100 grams of all meat or red meat is associated with a significant 12–17 percent increased risk of colorectal cancer '' in 2015 a report published by the international agency for research on cancer made the news by pointing out that every 50gram portion of processed meat such as bacon or salami eaten every day increases a persons risk of developing colorectal cancer by 18 percent this evidence led the who to classify processed meats as `` carcinogenic to humans '' the damage caused by unwholesome diets made the headlines again in early 2018 when a study published in the bmj reported that `` ultraprocessed foods '' might increase the risk of developing various types of cancer prevention what to eat so if a high intake of red meat and processed foods contributes to the risk of colorectal cancer what should be eaten to protect our bodies from this outcome in order to reduce the risk of colorectal cancer eat a healthful diet that favors fruit and veg according to the acs a diet high in fruits vegetables and fibers could help to minimize the risk and many existing studies seem to support this advice a study from the loma linda university in california found that vegetarianstyle diets are linked to a decreased risk of colorectal cancer the researchers studied four types of plantbased diet these were vegan or strictly no products of animal origin lactoovo vegetarian which includes dairy and eggs but no meat pescovegetarian which includes fish but no meat semivegetarian which includes meat and fish infrequently all four of these plantbased diets were deemed to be less likely to lead to cancer than nonvegetarian diets one study from last year also suggests that the more colorful your meal the better and that individuals should focus on integrating a rainbow of fruit and vegetables into their diets more specifically their experiments on the pig model which provides the closest resemblance to the human body in terms of metabolic processes indicated that purple potatoes might protect against colon cancer that may be because these root vegetables contain compounds that reduce levels of certain proinflammatory proteins in the body and inflammation is known to contribute to colon cancer risk the state of cancer are we close to a cure are we getting closer to finding a cure for cancer read now recently researchers have also isolated a number of elements typical of mediterraneanstyle diets that could help to prevent the onset of colorectal cancer people with a low risk of developing this condition ate plenty of fruits vegetables nuts and whole grains as well as fish and poultry rather than red meat and they drank little alcohol and soft drinks what to eat during and after treatment according to guidelines from the danafarber cancer institute in boston ma people undergoing treatment for colorectal cancer should also favor the `` rainbow plate '' meals and eat a varied array of fruits and vegetables to support their immune system a diet rich in tree nuts could improve the outcomes of cancer treatment eating small but frequent portions is another approach that specialists at the danafarber institute suggest that people following treatment may find useful they advise patients to stay hydrated and avoid alcohol and caffeine explaining that some types of medication may clash with these beverages but a previous study conducted by researchers at the institute which we covered on medical news today indicated that those undergoing treatment for colorectal cancer had an almost halved risk of cancer recurrence if they drank four cups of coffee or 460 milligrams of caffeine per day as lead study author charles fuchs explains `` we found that coffee drinkers had a lower risk of the cancer coming back and a significantly greater survival and chance of a cure '' research published last year in jama oncology suggests that a diet high in sources of fiber may improve survival rates for patients with stage one colorectal cancer eating whole grains was also linked to a better treatment outcome the researchers noted another study from last year notes that eating a minimum of 2 ounces approximately 57 grams of tree nuts such as cashews hazelnuts walnuts and pistachios almost halved the risk of colon cancer recurrence for individuals following stage three cancer treatment tree nut consumption also reduced the risk of death following treatment by 53 percent as for the risk of developing a second cancer following treatment the acs say that it can be reduced by making the same healthful diet choices advised for the prevention of a first cancer these include maintaining a healthy weight placing `` an emphasis on plant foods '' in daily meals and avoiding alcohol intake in fact dr victor moreno from the university of barcelona in spain and colleagues found that lifestyle factors are more important than genetic risk factors when it comes to the development of colorectal cancer '' this is important considering that lifestyle unlike genetic traits is somewhat modifiable '' first study author dr gemma ibáñez this suggests that a `` revamp '' of personal health choices may go a long way toward supporting positive outcomesresearchers in germany have found further evidence to support the idea that parkinsons could be an autoimmune disease immune cells act differently depending on whether or not a person has parkinsons using a stem cell model they showed how immune cells attacked dopamineproducing cells derived from people with parkinsons disease but not from people without it dopamine is a chemical messenger that supports many important brain functions these include functions that deal with reward emotions pleasure and movement control in parkinsons disease the midbrain neurons or brain cells that make dopamine die off but it is not clear what causes their death as more and more dopamine cells die levels of the chemical messenger drop giving rise to symptoms such as tremor slowness rigidity and problems with balance problems with speech and swallowing also develop as do several nonmovement symptoms estimates suggest that around half a million people in the united states have parkinsons disease autoimmunity and parkinsons autoimmune diseases arise because the immune system attacks healthy organs tissues and cells instead of protecting them there are at least 80 different known types of autoimmune disease including rheumatoid arthritis multiple sclerosis lupus and type 1 diabetes although the idea that parkinsons could be an autoimmune disease is not new the biological evidence to back it up is only just emerging in 2017 for instance a study from the us revealed how pieces of a protein that builds up in the dopamine cells of people with parkinsons can trigger a deadly immune attack against the cells parkinsons sniff test could predict risk up to a decade earlier adults who scored low on a sniff test were found to be almost five times more likely to develop parkinsons disease during a 10year followup read now more recently scientists have linked the use of drugs that subdue the immune system to a lower risk of developing parkinsons disease in the new study researchers from friedrichalexanderuniversität fau in erlangennürnberg germany have shown that t helper 17 th17 cells a type of immune t cell attack dopamine cells derived from people with parkinsons disease but not those derived from people without it they report their findings in the journal cell stem cell '' thanks to our investigations '' says senior study author beate winner a professor in the department of stem cell biology at fau `` we were able to clearly prove not only that t cells are involved in causing parkinsons disease but also what role they actually play '' stem cell model of parkinsons disease together with a team from the movement disorders clinic at university hospital erlangen the fau researchers had earlier discovered that the brains of those with parkinsons had higher levels of th17 cells th17 cells are also found in higher amounts in people with rheumatoid arthritis and other autoimmune diseases the discovery spurred the team to investigate further using a stem cell model of parkinsons disease to develop the model they took skin cells from people with and without parkinsons and induced them to become `` pluripotent stem cells '' pluripotent stem cells have the ability to mature into virtually any type of cell including neurons they coaxed the stem cells to mature into midbrain neurons that make dopamine this meant that they had batches of newly created dopamine cells that were specific to each of the patients the team then exposed each batch of dopamine cells to fresh th17 cells taken from the patients in this way each batch of patientspecific dopamine cells was exposed only to th17 cells that came from that same patient the results showed that while the th17 cells killed many of the dopamine cells from patients with parkinsons this did not happen with the cells that came from patients without the disease in further experiments the scientists also discovered that an antibody that was already in use in the hospital for the treatment of psoriasis was `` able to largely prevent the death '' of the brain cells '' the findings from our study offer a significant basis for new methods of treating parkinsons disease '' prof beate winnera largescale twopart study now published in the lancet public health journal examines the effects of high moderate and low carbohydrate intake on mortality risk the results of a new study could make you think twice before turning down carbs as more and more people are concerned with losing weight the prevalence of the lowcarb diet is increasing however new research points out that both too much carbohydrate and too little in our diet may be a cause for concern also according to the new research if you must choose between two types of lowcarb diet you should choose the one that replaces carbs with plantderived proteins and fats such diets may help prolong life unlike the diets that replace carbs with animal proteins and fat dr sara seidelmann who is a clinical and research fellow in cardiovascular medicine at brigham and womens hospital in boston ma led the research according to her `` lowcarb diets that replace carbohydrates with protein or fat are gaining widespread popularity as a health and weight loss strategy '' however our data suggest that animalbased lowcarbohydrate diets which are prevalent in north america and europe might be associated with shorter overall lifespan and should be discouraged '' '' instead if one chooses to follow a lowcarbohydrate diet then exchanging carbohydrates for more plantbased fats and proteins might actually promote healthy aging in the longterm '' dr sara seidelmann studying carbohydrate intake and mortality dr seidelmann and colleagues explain the motivation for their research previous studies they say have suggested that lowcarb diets are good for weight loss and metabolic health however these findings referred only to the short term the longterm effect of a low consumption of carbs on mortality risk has not garnered enough attention in the research community and the studies that have examined the matter yielded conflicting results also studies have not yet looked at the fat and protein sources in these lowcarb diets and their impact on mortality risk fats or carbs what causes obesity a new study settles the debate read now to remedy this the researchers studied over 15400 people aged 45–64 who registered in the atherosclerosis risk in communities study in 1987–1989 the male study participants reported an intake of 600–4200 kilocalories per day on average while the females said that they consumed 500–3600 kilocaleries per day the participants answered questions about their dietary habits both at the beginning of the study and 6 years later at followup the questionnaire asked about what types of food and drink the participants consumed in what portions and with what frequency then the scientists analyzed the link between overall carbohydrate consumption and mortality from any cause in the second stage of the study the team conducted a metaanalysis of cohort studies that summed up over 430000 people from across the world moderatecarb plantbased diet may be ideal the first part of the study revealed that both a low intake of carbs less than 40 percent of the total energy intake coming from carbs and a high intake or over 70 percent correlated with a higher risk of premature mortality by comparison a moderate carb intake of 50–55 percent of the total energy was found to correlate with 4 more years of life expectancy compared with people who consumed too little carbohydrate the second part of the study reinforced these findings and found that replacing carbs with animal proteins in a lowcarb diet correlated with a higher risk of mortality than consuming carbs in moderation '' too much and too little carbohydrate can be harmful but what counts most is the type of fat protein and carbohydrate '' says study coauthor walter willett a professor of epidemiology and nutrition at the harvard t h chan school of public health in boston ma senior study author dr scott solomon a professor of medicine at harvard medical school weighs in on the findings '' this work '' he says `` provides the most comprehensive study of carbohydrate intake that has been done to date and helps us better understand the relationship between the specific components of diet and longterm health '' '' while a randomized trial has not been performed to compare the longerterm effects of different types of lowcarbohydrate diets these data suggest that shifting towards a more plantbased consumption is likely to help attenuate major morbid disease '' dr scott solomonnew research has found that fasting triggers a molecule that can delay the aging of our arteries the findings could help prevent agerelated chronic diseases such as cancer cardiovascular disease and alzheimers scientists have discovered a new role for a molecule produced during fasting it can keep our vascular system supple and young the search for eternal youth has preoccupied the human imagination since the times of ancient greece in fact a quick look at greek mythology shows that youth was more prized than immortality as some myths tell the story of how futile the latter is if its not accompanied by the former in this regard modern medicine has recently been catching up with ancient mythology emerging scientific breakthroughs encourage us to hope that the myth of eternal youth will soon become a reality in a recent study researchers were able to reverse signs of aging such as hair loss and wrinkles in mice and perhaps more impressively another team of researchers managed to rejuvenate aging human cells now a new study adds to the evidence that aging can indeed be reversed scientists led by dr minghui zou the director of the center for molecular and translational medicine at georgia state university in atlanta showed that fasting or restricting calorie intake can produce a molecule that delays vascular aging the findings were published in the journal molecular cell how a ketone molecule keeps cells young dr zou explains the motivation for this study saying `` the most important part of aging is vascular aging when people become older the vessels that supply different organs are the most sensitive and more subject to aging damage so studying vascular aging is very important '' so the scientists set out to focus on vascular aging on the changes that occur with senescence and on ways to prevent them could this hormone rejuvenate memory a hormone produced in our bones may prevent agerelated cognitive decline read now specifically the researchers looked at the link between calorie restriction and vascular aging dr zou used mouse models of atherosclerosis studied their aortas postmortem and performed a series of cell culture experiments they also induced starvation in the rodents and conducted similar tests they saw that as expected the starving mice produced the molecule betahydroxybutyrate surprisingly however this molecule also prevented vascular aging betahydroxybutyrate is a ketone that is a molecule produced by the liver and used as an energy source when glucose is not available the body produces ketones during fasting or starvation on lowcarb diets and after prolonged exercise interestingly the research also revealed that betahydroxybutyrate promotes the division and multiplication of the cells that line the inside of blood vessels cellular division is a marker of cellular youth '' we found that betahydroxybutyrate can delay vascular aging thats actually providing a chemical link between calorie restriction and fasting and the antiaging effect '' dr minghui zou '' this compound can delay vascular aging through endothelial cells '' dr zou explains `` which line the interior surface of blood vessels and lymphatic vessels it can prevent one type of cell aging called senescence or cellular aging '' a drug target to stop aging chronic disease the study also revealed that the compound triggers another chain reaction that keeps the dna of these endothelial cells young and undamaged more specifically when betahydroxybutyrate attaches to the rnabinding protein heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein a1 it boosts the activity of a stem cell transcriptional factor called octamerbinding transcriptional factor oct4 in turn oct4 `` increases lamin b1 a key factor against dna damageinduced senescence '' which keeps the blood vessels young '' this stem cell factor oct4 '' says dr zou `` could be a pharmaceutical or pharmacological target for slowing down or preventing aging '' '' then if the vascular system becomes younger it is less likely to have cardiovascular disease alzheimers disease and cancer because all of these diseases are agerelated '' dr minghui zou '' we think this is a very important discovery and we are working on finding a new chemical that can mimic the effect of this ketone bodys function '' dr zou adds '' its difficult to convince people not to eat for the next 24 hours to increase the concentration of this compound and not everybody can do that but if we can find something that can mimic this effect and people can still eat it would make life more enjoyable and help fight disease ''hot tea is a staple beverage in winter time it can help to keep us warm and soothe sore throats it can give us that energy boost in the morning or help to relax us in the afternoon however a new study suggests that drinking hot tea may have serious negative consequences for some of us many of us enjoy a hot cup of tea but could we be putting ourselves at risk without knowing it across the world hot tea is a muchloved drink euromonitor international estimate that around 29 million tons of tea were consumed in 2016 alone this comes as no surprise seeing that teas are tasty and can bring many health benefits often brought about by the antioxidant effects of compounds such as polyphenols however a recent study from peking university in beijing china has found that the temperature at which tea is consumed could affect health particularly in certain groups already at risk of negative health outcomes lead study author jun lv a doctoral student from peking universitys department of epidemiology and biostatistics found that the consumption of hot tea correlates with the onset of esophageal cancer according to the world cancer research fund international esophageal cancer is the eighth most common type of cancer worldwide in the united states there were an estimated 16940 new cases of esophageal cancer in 2017 while in 2014 approximately 45547 people had this type of cancer according to lv drinking hot tea on a regular basis is linked to esophageal cancer in people who also smoke and drink alcohol habitually thus pointing to a complex favorable conjuncture for the development of this disease lv and colleagues conducted their research as part of the national natural science foundation of china and the national key research and development program the studys findings were published in the journal annals of internal medicine a fivefold increase in risk of cancer lv and team studied the link between drinking tea at very high temperatures and the development of esophageal cancer in the chinese population china is not only the number one consumer of tea but it is also a country with one of the highest incidences of this type of cancer according to the researchers chinese men in particular are most likely to be keen on not only hot tea but on cigarettes and alcohol as well the combination of tobacco alcohol compounds found in tea and the negative effects of drinks served at very high temperatures is likely to attack health eventually lv and colleagues suggest one injection could kill cancer are we drawing nearer to a cure for cancer read now the researchers monitored the health of participants in the china kadoorie biobank study whose aim is to collect data on the development of chronic diseases including heart diseases cancer and diabetes in china to ensure the consistency of their results the scientists excluded participants who had an existing diagnosis of cancer as well as those who had cut down on tea alcohol and cigarettes in the end they analyzed the data sourced from 456155 adult participants aged between 30 and 79 all these participants health developments were then followedup for a median period of 92 years during this period 1731 participants were diagnosed with esophageal cancer lv and team uncovered a positive correlation between drinking burninghot tea regular alcohol intake and smoking and a higher risk of esophageal cancer those who engaged in all three of these habits showed a fivefold increase in the risk for this type of cancer compared with their peers who did not drink tea at high temperatures drink alcohol or smoke cigarettes individuals who only drank hot tea and who did not drink alcohol or smoke did not have a higher risk of esophageal cancer either suggesting that the concerted effect of those three behaviors was a major risk factor based on the findings lv and colleagues advise people to choose their habits carefully and if they find it challenging to give up their daily drink or cigarette the researchers suggest that its best to avoid drinking tea at very high temperatures they conclude '' our findings suggest that abstaining from hot tea might be beneficial for preventing esophageal cancer in persons who drink alcohol excessively or smoke ''intermittent fasting such as eating only on alternate days might enhance the ability of aerobic exercise to increase endurance because the body switches to using fats and ketones as a source of fuel for muscles instead of carbohydrates research shows the effects of intermittent fasting on endurance this was the conclusion that researchers came to after studying the effect in mice with such a regimen for a limited period of time their study is to be published in the faseb journal the findings suggest that three meals per day and snacking may not be the only eating habit for people who engage in endurance sports to reach peak performance and maintain good health '' emerging evidence '' explains senior study author dr mark mattson from the laboratory of neurosciences in the national institute on aging in baltimore md `` suggests that intermittent dietary energy restriction might improve overall health and reduce risk factors for diabetes and cardiovascular disease in humans '' he and his team say that their findings propose that a similar pattern of eating and fasting may boost the beneficial effect of moderate aerobic exercise on endurance and that it should be studied further food deprivation exercise and endurance for the study the team put mice into four groups and observed them for 2 months as they went through the following exercise and eating patterns the control ctrl mice did not exercise at all and could eat as much food as they wanted every day like the ctrl mice the exercise ex mice could eat as much daily food as they wanted but they also ran on a treadmill for 45 minutes each day the `` alternate day food deprivation '' adf mice were only fed a fixed amount on every other day and did not exercise at all the exadf mice were restricted to the adf eating pattern but also exercised every day on a treadmill for 45 minutes how intermittent fasting can increase weight loss learn how researchers explored the chemical pathways that might be involved in intermittent fasting without restricting overall calorie intake read now as expected the results showed that the mice that exercised daily the ex and exadf groups performed better in endurance tests than the two groups that did not exercise at all ctrl and adf however the adf mice that exercised daily the exadf group had better endurance that is they could run farther and last longer than the daily exercise mice that were allowed to eat what they wanted the ex group the researchers also found that the mice on adf were able to maintain their body weight and had better glucose tolerance `` regardless of whether they exercised or not '' they note that following glucose metabolism although the ex groups glucose levels recovered at a faster rate than the ctrl groups the glucose levels of the adf and exadf groups recovered even faster shifted fuel preference the results showed that the effect of adf was to `` shift fuel preference '' in muscles toward fatty acids and away from carbohydrates and it also `` enhanced endurance '' in the adf mice that exercised exadf the researchers also found that the enhanced endurance performance did not come from changes to volume of oxygen usage or vo2max a way of measuring the amount of energy used during exercise as the rise in this measure was the same in both exercise groups ex and exadf instead the increased endurance in the exercising adf mice exadf group compared with the unrestricted eating exercising mice ex group came from a reduction in their respiratory exchange ratio or the ratio of co2 produced to o2 consumed this note the authors suggests that adf caused the fuel source to switch from carbohydrates to fats the scientists also observed that adf affects the liver differently to exercise for example adf alters gene expression that regulates `` lipid metabolism and cell growth '' whereas exercise changes gene expression that alters `` calcium signaling and stress adaptation '' the findings support the idea that evolutionary pressure has caused the body to optimize and perform extremely well when food is scarce dr thoru pederson editorinchief of the faseb journal comments on this '' this study reminds us of the nexus between our own huntergatherer metabolism still operative and modern habits with the findings from this animal system likely transferable to us to a considerable degree '' dr thoru pedersonsome cancers put up a fight against regular treatments such as chemotherapy or radiotherapy due to their various `` strategies '' for survival but by manipulating cellular processes scientists have now found a way of bypassing one of cancers selfpreservation mechanisms recent research reveals how we may be able to bypass one of cancers survival strategies and trigger tumor cell death autophagy a term meaning `` selfdevouring '' in greek is normally cells way of staying orderly and functional this is due to the fact that when autophagy is triggered cells break down the elements that arent useful any longer and `` recycle '' material for reuse this process has been shown to have complex implications for cancer cells sometimes it helps to destroy them but at other times it helps them to thrive one way in which cancer cells use autophagy `` in their own interest '' is to evade apoptosis or cell death apoptosis and autophagy both rely on similar mechanisms to break down cellular material that is no longer helpful but while apoptosis takes this disassembly all the way eventually causing the cell to die in autophagy death is postponed by recycling some of the cellular material in many cases researchers have discovered that chemotherapy and radiotherapy can increase the presence of autophagy in cancer cells which actually allows them to enter a `` hiatus '' mode that helps them to evade cell death and resume their activity later while researchers have studied the importance of autophagy inhibitors in promoting apoptosis the underlying mechanisms that allow cell death to occur when this recycling process is inhibited have remained unclear now researchers from the university of colorado cancer center in aurora have begun to uncover some of these mechanisms which has also allowed them to develop a fresh strategy to bypass tumor cells autophagy and trigger their death more efficiently the results of the study which was led by andrew thorburn have now been published in the journal developmental cell autophagy as suspended animation in the new study the researchers explain that the sofar mysterious link between autophagy and apoptosis is transcription factor foxo3a which is a protein that carries with it `` instructions '' as to what should take place at cellular level '' the problem '' says thorburn `` is this many anticancer treatments push cancer cells to the brink of death but the cells use autophagy to go into a kind of suspended animation pausing but not dying '' '' we dont want cancer cells to pause we want them to die we show that foxo3a may make the difference between these two outcomes '' andrew thorburn it turns out that foxo3a plays a key role in the cellular homeostasis related to autophagy that is it helps to regulate that process interestingly though autophagy also helps to regulate the levels of this transcription factor in other words when the presence of autophagy is increased foxo3a levels go down and when autophagy is downregulated more foxo3a is produced thereby boosting the cellular recycling process this means that autophagy remains at constant levels sometimes despite the action of chemotherapy drugs the state of cancer are we close to a cure where is cancer research in its quest for a cure read now previous research carried out at thorburns laboratory revealed that another protein known as puma is key in `` telling '' cells when to selfdestruct now thorburn and team have also found that foxo3a can increase the expression of the gene that drives the production of puma long story short when autophagy is inhibited more foxo3a is produced and when that happens the heightened levels of foxo3a help boost the presence of autophagy in cancer cells again but at the same time the transcription factor increases the presence of puma which drives cell death mechanism suggests combination therapy following these discoveries the scientists were interested in seeing whether they could use these mechanisms to render cancer cells more vulnerable to apoptosis their strategy involved using autophagy inhibitors alongside a tumor suppressing drug called nutlin while the drug is known to stunt the growth of cancer cells it had not been tied to triggering cell death so the researchers wanted to learn whether by pairing it up with autophagy inhibitors apoptosis would be prompted more efficiently the reason why thorburn and colleagues decided to test both therapies in concert is because both autophagy inhibition and nutlin are known to increase the production of puma though they do so through independent channels foxo3a and a transcription factor known as p53 respectively '' what we wanted to see '' says first author brent fitzwalter `` is whether these two things together nutlin along with autophagy inhibition would increase puma past the point of growth inhibition and into actual cell death '' after analyzing a series of tests conducted on cell cultures and mouse models of cancer tumors the researchers were delighted to see that this strategy did work the way they hoped it would '' the result was that we turned a drug that could slow down tumor growth but couldnt kill cancer cells into one that now kills the cells '' andrew thorburn these findings the researchers add could provide the groundwork for future clinical trials putting this combination treatment to the test to confirm its effectcoffee is a complex substance and as a new study finds its metabolic interactions are equally complex surprisingly coffee influences the same regions of the brain as cannabis a new study finds an intriguing relationship between cannabis and coffee although studies looking at coffees health benefits or lack thereof appear to be published on an almost daily basis its true impact on health is still poorly understood some studies have found health benefits some have concluded that it might reduce mortality risk and others drew no solid conclusions this confusion is due to several factors and one is the difficulty in separating cause and effect in large populationbased studies for example someone who drinks a lot of coffee might also sleep less smoke more tobacco drink less water or work unsociable hours these factors muddy the statistical waters also coffee is an incredibly complex beast it contains more than 1000 aroma compounds levels of which vary depending on the type of coffee bean and how it is brewed the metabolites of coffee recently a group of researchers from northwestern university in chicago il took a detailed look at the impact of coffee consumption on our internal chemistry their findings were published this week in the journal of internal medicine the 3month study involved 47 people living in finland in the first month the participants drank no coffee at all in the second they consumed four cups every day and in the third they drank eight cups each day cannabis intoxication may be stopped with antiobesity drug researchers may have found an antidote to cannabinoid intoxication read now using advanced profiling techniques lead author marilyn cornelis and her team checked the levels of more than 800 metabolites in the blood after each stage metabolites are chemicals produced during metabolism they are generally small molecules and carry out a range of functions both within and between cells the scientists found that with increased coffee consumption blood metabolites involved in the endocannabinoid system dropped off this is the system that gives cannabis its recreational and medical effects interestingly the effect of coffee consumption on the endocannabinoid system was the opposite to cannabis use endocannabinoid neurotransmitters decreased with the consumption of eight cups per day but levels are increased by cannabis use endocannabinoids may answer queries the endocannabinoid system helps to modulate a whole host of metabolic activities including blood pressure cognition addiction immunity appetite sleep and glucose metabolism so if coffee influences this overarching system it will open up many new research avenues '' these are entirely new pathways by which coffee might affect health '' notes cornelis `` now we want to delve deeper and study how these changes affect the body '' for instance the endocannabinoid system is believed to influence eating behavior as cornelis says this could help to explain `` the link between cannabis use and the munchies '' conversely coffee has been considered a potential weight loss aid and may reduce type 2 diabetes risk '' this is often thought to be due to caffeines ability to boost fat metabolism or the glucoseregulating effects of polyphenols plantderived chemicals '' marilyn cornelis '' our new findings linking coffee to endocannabinoids '' she adds `` offer alternative explanations worthy of further study '' drinking more coffee was also found to increase metabolites from the androsteroid system this infers that coffee speeds up the excretion of steroids and because steroids are involved in a number of conditions notably cancers coffee could potentially play a part here too this study was the first to have demonstrated such a depth of metabolic interaction between coffee and the endocannabinoid system no doubt these new learnings will form the foundations of future research into a range of conditions however more work will be needed to understand whether the observed changes in metabolites were due to caffeine or one of the myriad other compounds in those cups of delicious black goldone of the hallmarks of advanced prostate cancer is a faulty pten tumor suppressor gene now after screening compounds for their effect on cells lacking pten scientists have discovered that a natural insecticide called deguelin can kill such cells by disrupting their energy supply researchers reveal how a natural insecticide can destroy advanced prostate cancer cells deguelin belongs to a class of drugs known as mitochondrial inhibitors the drugs block the action of mitochondria mitochondria are the tiny compartments inside cells that convert glucose in the cell into molecules of adenosine triphosphate atp which serve as units of energy for fueling the various workings of the cell scientists at cold spring harbor laboratory in new york found that treating cells lacking pten with some types of mitochondrial inhibitor caused the cells to use glucose from their environment to make atp and then transport it into their mitochondria to preserve them it is as though cells without pten explains study leader lloyd trotman a professor at cold spring harbor laboratory are driven to `` consume vast quantities of glucose '' to help their mitochondria survive they do this to the point where they run out of fuel and die the researchers describe their work which included the use of a genetic mouse model of metastatic prostate cancer that was developed by prof trotmans group in a paper now published in the journal cell reports they suggest that their findings show that at the right dose certain mitochondrial inhibitors such as deguelin and another that they identified called rotenone may be able to kill prostate cancer cells without harming healthy cells however they also note that the timing and conditions have to be just right – for example the drug would not work if glucose levels are high '' the hope is '' prof trotman explains `` that carefully timed administration of these drugs can generate a much better window of selective killing '' prostate cancer and tumor suppressors after skin cancer prostate cancer is the most common cancer in men in the united states where in 2017 an estimated 161360 people discovered that they had the disease in the vast majority of cases prostate cancer is diagnosed before the disease has started to spread while the cancer is in this localized state it is much easier to treat and the 5year survival rate is close to 100 percent however once the cancer has become metastatic that is it has spread and set up new tumors in other parts of the body it is much harder to treat for men diagnosed with metastatic or advanced prostate cancer the average 5year survival rate is 29 percent in their study paper the authors note that a `` hallmark of advanced prostate cancer '' is that two tumor suppressor genes pten and p53 do not work properly because they are mutated when tumor suppressor genes work properly they `` slow down cell division '' repair broken dna and trigger programmed cell death faulty tumor suppressor genes on the other hand fail to carry out these functions and give rise to faulty cells that can grow uncontrollably and cause cancer deguelin stopped cancer progression prof trotman and colleagues suggest that of the 3 million men in the us who have prostate cancer `` roughly 100000 carry cancers with comutation of pten and p53 '' this `` prompted '' them to look for drugs that might work specifically against prostate cancers that carry mutated pten and p53 however because `` several studies '' have shown that loss only of p53 does not give rise to prostate cancer they decided to focus on pten shapeshifting cancer cells promote metastasis learn how loss of certain proteins makes prostate cancer cells able to change shape migrate and invade other tissues read now the researchers began the study by running a series of experiments using cells with and without pten they found that deguelin had the capacity to kill both types of cell but the dose required to kill cells with pten the normal cell model was 500 times higher than the dose required to kill cells without pten the cancer cell model they also discovered that the drug had a much stronger effect on the cells without pten because their mitochondria were consuming atp `` instead of producing it '' '' thats the exact opposite '' prof trotman says `` of what mitochondria are supposed to be doing mitochondria are supposed to generate atp for the rest of the cell '' finally when they then tested deguelin in their mouse model of `` lethal '' metastatic prostate cancer the researchers found that it stopped the cancer progressing drug requires low glucose levels the researchers suggest that the `` vulnerability '' that their findings have identified in ptendeficient cells may pave the way for `` highly selective targeting of incurable '' prostate cancer using mitochondrial inhibitors metformin the widely prescribed diabetes drug is also a mitochondrial inhibitor and is already being tested in clinical trials as an anticancer treatment the authors note that in the case of prostate cancer treatment with metformin seems to reduce disease deaths but not incidence '' this suggests '' they add `` that metformin may preferentially target aggressive prostate cancer '' and there are currently trials trying to find this out they propose that their new findings `` contribute to these efforts '' however they note that their study also suggests that one of the conditions necessary for mitochondrial inhibitors to have `` maximal selective killing '' power is `` depletion of tumor cell glucose supplies '' this would indicate the need for a treatment scenario that is opposite to that of diabetes in which metformin is taken just after a meal when blood glucose levels are high the authors conclude '' our results instead suggest that greater selectivity might be achieved if drugs are given when blood glucose levels are low ''finding a link between osteoarthritis and the bacteria in our guts seems unlikely however new research concludes that they could in fact be bedfellows a new study probes gut bacteria and their role in osteoarthritis obesity comes with a raft of related health risks including diabetes and cardiovascular disease it is also intimately tied to osteoarthritis often referred to as the `` wear and tear '' arthritis osteoarthritis involves the slow degradation of cartilage or the padding between bones in a joint in the united states osteoarthritis affects an estimated 31 million people and is a leading cause of disability globally as it stands osteoarthritis can not be cured people who carry excess weight put extra strain on their joints this it was thought explained the increased risk of osteoarthritis that comes with obesity a new study published this week in the journal jci insight looked at a more intriguing mechanism that might link these two conditions gut bacteria we have billions of bacteria living in our intestines they are vital for good health and over recent years just how vital they are has become increasingly clear researchers from the university of rochester medical center in new york set out to explore what links there might be between diet obesity gut bacteria and osteoarthritis googleadslotinfopush { '' slotname '' mnt_dlb1 '' slotcontainer '' mnt_dlb1_container } fattening up mice to begin with the researchers fed mice a highfat diet over a 12week period they quickly became diabetic and obese doubling their percentage of body fat next the bacterial residents of the animals colons were assessed as expected their microbiomes were offkilter their bowels were overrun with proinflammatory bacteria and had a distinct lack of healthy probiotic bacteria such as bifidobacteria osteoarthritis could researchers have found the key to prevention a new study may have revealed a new prevention and treatment strategy for osteoarthritis read now at the same time the scientists observed bodywide inflammation in the obese mice including the knee joints to induce osteoarthritis the researchers tore the animals menisci or the cushion of cartilage between the shin and thigh bones this type of injury commonly causes osteoarthritis in the obese mice osteoarthritis developed much more quickly than in the control mice in fact within 12 weeks virtually all of the obese mices cartilage had gone '' cartilage '' says michael zuscik phd an associate professor of orthopaedics in the center for musculoskeletal research `` is both a cushion and lubricant supporting frictionfree joint movements '' when you lose that '' he says `` its bone on bone rock on rock its the end of the line and you have to replace the whole joint preventing that from happening is what we as osteoarthritis researchers strive to do to keep that cartilage '' googleadslotinfopush { '' slotname '' mnt_dlb2 '' slotcontainer '' mnt_dlb2_container } can cartilage degradation be slowed for the next phase of the study the scientists started the protocol again they fattened up mice with a 12week highfat diet but this time they included a prebiotic called oligofructose prebiotics not to be confused with probiotics can not be broken down by mouse or human guts however many beneficial bacteria such as bifidobacteria thrive in their presence this subtle but important change in diet promoted the growth of healthy bacteria and produced a marked reduction in proinflammatory bacteria importantly it also reduced inflammation in the joints and the knee cartilage of the obese mice was indistinguishable from that of the nonobese control mice the addition of a prebiotic to the diet also reduced diabetic symptoms but it made no difference to the amount of weight that the mice gained so even though the joints were subjected to the same amount of strain they were healthier this supports the theory that inflammation rather than mechanical strain is the key driver of osteoarthritis '' that reinforces the idea that osteoarthritis is another secondary complication of obesity just like diabetes heart disease and stroke which all have inflammation as part of their cause '' robert mooney phd a professor of pathology and laboratory medicine '' perhaps '' adds prof mooney `` they all share a similar root and the microbiome might be that common root '' googleadslotinfopush { '' slotname '' mnt_dlb3 '' slotcontainer '' mnt_dlb3_container } a note of caution it is vital to remind ourselves that though the findings are exciting there are significant differences between the mouse microbiome and our own the next step therefore will be to move this line of investigation into humans the leaders of this study plan to team up with the military and veteran microbiome consortium for research and education at the us department of veterans affairs in denver co they hope to compare the microbiomes of veterans with and without obesityrelated osteoarthritis they will supplement some of these participants with prebiotics to gauge how much benefit this intervention might have in humansnew research suggests that intermittent fasting may raise insulin levels damage pancreatic cells and increase the amount of abdominal fat intermittent fasting may be a popular diet but it may also harm our metabolic health suggests a new study the socalled intermittent fasting diet has been gaining more and more traction among people who want to lose weight quickly this popular diet consists of `` fast '' days where one drastically restricts their calorie intake to a quarter of the daily dose or less for instance and `` feast '' days where the person dieting can eat whatever they please sometimes referred to as a dieting `` fad '' intermittent fasting has become popular in recent years due to its suggested benefits of increasing lifespan and staving off cancer indeed some animal studies have indicated that intermittent fasting may lower the risk of cancer while observational studies have shown that people whose religion has them fasting regularly live longer than seniors who do not fast but could there also be downsides to intermittent fasting research presented at the european society of endocrinology annual meeting which took place in barcelona spain suggests that the dieting practice may have serious consequences for a persons metabolism specifically the new study led by ana cláudia munhoz bonassa a researcher at the university of são paulo in brazil suggests that intermittent fasting may impair the normal activity of the pancreas and the production of insulin which may in turn raise the risk of type 2 diabetes intermittent fasting may lead to diabetes the researchers were prompted in their endeavor by older studies suggesting that fasting for a short period of time increases oxidative stress and the production of free radicals oxidative stress and excessive levels of free radicals have been suggested to speed up the aging process and to damage our dna raising the risk of cancer cardiovascular disease and neurodegeneration to find out whether intermittent fasting does indeed generate free radicals bonassa and her colleagues placed healthy adult rats on the diet for a period of 3 months going vegan could prevent type 2 diabetes the plantbased diet may keep diabetes at bay suggests a new study read now during this time the researchers measured and monitored the rodents insulin levels and function their body weight and their free radical levels at the end of the dieting period the rats had lost weight as expected however the distribution of their body fat changed unexpectedly the amount of fat tissue in the rodents abdomen increased belly fat has been shown by recent studies to be deeply linked with type 2 diabetes with some research even suggesting a molecular mechanism through which the former may lead to the latter additionally bonassa and colleagues found damage in the insulinsecreting pancreatic cells as well as higher levels of free radicals and signs of insulin resistance the studys lead author comments on the findings saying `` we should consider that overweight or obese people who opt for intermittent fasting diets may already have insulin resistance '' '' so '' bonassa continues `` although this diet may lead to early rapid weight loss in the longterm there could be potentially serious damaging effects to their health such as the development of type 2 diabetes '' '' this is the first study to show that despite weight loss intermittent fasting diets may actually damage the pancreas and affect insulin function in normal healthy individuals which could lead to diabetes and serious health issues '' ana cláudia munhoz bonassa in future the scientists plan to study in more detail the damaging effects of intermittent fasting on the normal functioning of the pancreas and the insulin hormonewhile viruses are best known for causing disease and suffering scientists have recently designed a way to use them as a force for good in the fight against cancer viruses an example of which is shown here have a bad name but can they be used therapeuticallyimage credit graham beards viruses are small rapidly replicating infectious agents that can only survive within the cells of other organisms they can be found in every ecosystem on earth and can infect all lifeforms capable of causing thousands of conditions from the common cold to the crimeancongo hemorrhagic fever viruses are as successful as they are deadly using their spectacularly successful traits scientists from cardiff university in the united kingdom are currently investigating ways to turn viruses against cancer the researchers have successfully `` trained '' viruses to recognize ovarian cancer and kill it without harming any healthy tissue retraining viruses the new study builds on similar research from recent years colead author dr alan parker notes '' reprogrammed viruses are already being used in gene therapy procedures to treat a range of diseases demonstrating they can be trained from being lifethreatening into potentially lifesaving agents '' cancer virus fuels immune system to attack brain tumors this study uses viruses to target aggressive brain tumors by injecting them into the bloodstream read now but in the past it was not possible to make the viruses selective enough such a lack of selectivity meant that they would also invade healthy cells and cause them damage in their new paper which is now published in the journal clinical cancer research the researchers outline a new approach that avoids this problem as dr parker explains `` weve taken a common wellstudied virus and completely redesigned it so that it can no longer attach to noncancerous cells but instead seeks out a specific marker protein called alphavbeta6 αvβ6 integrin which is unique to certain cancer cells allowing it to invade them '' evil turned good once a virus has entered a cell it hijacks the cellular machinery to make thousands of copies of itself then the cell ruptures and the new viruses are free to infect neighboring cells in the retrained viruses the same occurs but only cancer cells are invaded and ruptured the viruss ability to replicate so quickly makes them a formidable pathogen but once they have been repurposed their rapid multiplication becomes a therapeutic benefit as an added bonus the virus triggers an immune response and helps the immune system to recognize target and destroy the cancerous cells '' in this case we introduced the reprogrammed virus to ovarian cancer which it successfully identified and destroyed this is an exciting advance offering real potential for patients with a variety of cancers '' dr alan parker in the future the researchers hope to tweak their viral weapon further they want to train the virus to recognize a protein component that is shared by ovarian breast pancreatic lung and oral cancers also farther down the line the scientists hope to make the virus even more powerful they believe that by tinkering with its dna they might be able to program it to produce and release antibodies or other anticancer compounds while it is housed within the cell these initial studies were carried out on a mouse model of ovarian cancer but within the next 5 years they hope that the reprogrammed viruses will reach the clinical trials stagethere are a million things that we do every day without thinking brushing our teeth drying our hair after a shower and unlocking our phone screen so we can check our messages are all part of our routine but what takes place in the brain as we learn a new habit what happens in the brain when habits take shape whats something youve learned to do without thinking it might be locking the door behind you as you leave which could lead to some panic later as you wonder if you actually remembered to do it it might be driving to work have you ever had that uncanny experience of finding yourself at your destination without fully remembering how you got there i certainly have and its all thanks to the brains trusty autopilot mode habits drive our lives so much so that sometimes we might want to break the habit as the saying goes and experience something new but habits are a useful tool when we do something enough times we become effortlessly good at it which is perhaps why aristotle reportedly believed that `` excellence is not an act but a habit '' so what does habit formation look like in the brain how do our neural networks behave as we learn something and consolidate it into an effortless behavior through repetition these are the questions that ann graybiel and her colleagues from the massachusetts institute of technology in chestnut hill set out to answer in a recent study the findings of which are published in the journal current biology bookending neural signals although a habitual action seems so simple and effortless it actually typically involves a string of small necessary movements such as unlocking the car getting into it adjusting the mirrors securing the seatbelt and so on this complex set of movements that amount to one routine action that we perform unconsciously is called `` chunking '' and although we know that it exists exactly how `` chunks '' form and stabilize has remained mysterious so far could this protein hold the key to memory to store or not to store learn about the protein that may hold the key to memory retention read now the new study now suggests that some brain cells are tasked with `` bookending '' the chunks that correspond to habitual actions in another study graybiel and her former team found that the striatum a region of the brain previously associated with decisionmaking also plays an important role in acquiring habits working with mice the team noted that the patterns of signals transmitted between neurons in the striatum shifted as the animals were taught a new sequence of actions turning in one direction at a sound signal while navigating a maze which then evolved into a habit at the beginning of the learning process the neurons in the mices striata emitted a continuous string of signals the scientists saw but as the mices actions started to consolidate into habitual movements the neurons fired their distinctive signals only at the beginning and at the end of the task performed when a signaling pattern takes root explain graybiel and colleagues a habit has taken shape and breaking it becomes a difficult endeavor brain patterns that indicate habits although edifying graybiels previous efforts did not establish for certain that the signaling patterns observed in the brain were related to habit formation they could simply have been motor commands that regulated the mices running behavior in order to confirm the idea that the patterns corresponded to the chunking associated with habit formation graybiel and her current team devised a different set of experiments in the new study they set out to teach rats to press two levers repeatedly in a specific order the researchers used reward conditioning to motivate the animals if they pressed the levers in the correct sequence they were offered chocolate milk to ensure that there would be no doubt regarding the solidity of the experiments results and that they would be able to identify brain activity patterns related to habit formation rather than anything else the scientists taught the rats different sequences sure enough once the animals had learned to press the levers in the sequence established by their trainers the team noticed the same `` bookending '' pattern in the striatum sets of neurons would fire signals at the beginning and end of a task thus delimitating a `` chunk '' `` i think '' explains graybiel `` this more or less proves that the development of bracketing patterns serves to package up a behavior that the brain and the animals consider valuable and worth keeping in their repertoire '' '' it really is a highlevel signal that helps to release that habit and we think the end signal says the routine has been done '' ann graybiel finally the team also noted the formation of another complementary pattern of activity in a group of inhibitory brain cells called `` interneurons '' in the striatum '' the interneurons '' explains lead study author nuné martiros of harvard university in cambridge ma `` were activated during the time when the rats were in the middle of performing the learned sequence '' she adds that the interneurons `` could possibly be preventing the principal neurons from initiating another routine until the current one was finished '' '' the discovery of this opposite activity by the interneurons '' martiros concludes `` also gets us one step closer to understanding how brain circuits can actually produce this pattern of activity ''eat well for a long and healthy life – thats a mantra that were all familiar with but what are the best foods to help us achieve that goal in this article we give you an overview of some of the most healthful and nutritious foods what are the best foods for a healthful diet we investigate official figures indicate that currently the top three countries in the world with the highest life expectancy are the principality of monaco japan and singapore these are places where the inhabitants experience a high quality of life and an important element of that is eating healthful meals often we find praise for `` superfoods '' in the media – foods so high in nutritional value that they are seen as dietary superheroes nutritionists reject the term `` superfoods '' as a buzzword that can influence people to place too high an expectation on a limited range of foods when in reality a balanced diet and healthful lifestyle require more effort than eating your fiveaday still there are certain foods that are more nutritious than others and many that as research has shown have a protective effect against a range of diseases here we give you an overview of some of the best foods that you may want to consider including in your diet in your quest for a happy healthy life edamame soybeans edamame or fresh soybeans have been a staple of asian cuisine for generations but they have also been gaining popularity on the western front of late soybeans are often sold in snack packs but they are also added to a varied range of dishes from soups to ricebased meals though they are served as cooked and seasoned on their own too edamame and tofu are rich in isoflavones which may have anticancer properties the beans are rich in isoflavones a type of phytoestrogen – that is plantderived estrogenlike substances isoflavones are known to have antiinflammatory antioxidant anticancer and antimicrobial properties thus they can help to regulate the inflammatory response of the body slow down cellular aging fight microbes as well as reportedly protect against certain types of cancer edamame are rich in two types of isoflavones in particular genistein and daidzein a study covered last year on medical news today found that genistein could be used to improve breast cancer treatment in the meantime the study authors note that `` lifetime intake of soy has been linked to reduced risk of breast cancer '' so we may want to include soybeans in our normal diet tofu soybean curd similarly tofu a white cheeselike product made of soybean curds has been linked to a wealth of health benefits for the same reasons tofu is often found cooked in typical eastern asian dishes it can be fried baked or boiled for instance in soups as a soy product it is rich in isoflavones whose health benefits weve outlined above it is also a good source of protein and it contains all the essential amino acids that our bodies need to synthesize protein moreover it is also rich in minerals which our bodies need to keep our teeth and bones strong and healthy and to derive energy tofu is a source of calcium iron manganese selenium phosphorous magnesium zinc and copper some specialists also suggest that eating tofu can make you feel fuller for longer so incorporating it into your meals may help to prevent overeating carrots this common culinary ingredient best known in its orange variety is famously recommended for its high content of betacarotene a pigment and carotenoid that gives the widespread version of this root vegetable its color carrots can protect against agerelated eyesight damage betacarotene can be converted by our bodies into vitamin a which according to the national institutes of health nih `` is involved in immune function vision reproduction and cellular communication '' our bodies can not produce vitamin a on their own so it must be derived from our diet this pigment is also an antioxidant that can protect the cells in our bodies from the aging damage caused by free radicals moreover research has shown that foods rich in carotenoids and of course carrots are a prime example here can protect against agerelated macular degeneration the vision damage caused by old age some varieties of carrots such as white carrots do not contain the orange pigment betacarotene but they do all contain falcarinol a nutrient which some studies claim may have a protective effect against cancer while raw carrots may be best for health as they retain their nutrients there are also ways of cooking carrots that can keep most of their nutrients `` locked in '' in an interview one researcher who investigated the anticancer effect of falcarinol from carrots kirsten brandt from newcastle university in the united kingdom suggests that we may want to boil our carrots whole if we want them cooked but still bursting with nutrients '' chopping up your carrots increases the surface area so more of the nutrients leach out into the water while they are cooked by keeping them whole and chopping them up afterwards you are locking in nutrients and the taste so the carrot is better for you all round '' cruciferous vegetables another important type of food on our list are cruciferous vegetables also known as `` brassica vegetables '' which include a wide array of green foods such as cabbage broccoli brussels sprouts cauliflower bok choy radish and kale cruciferous vegetables can bring a wealth of health benefits these vegetables boast an especially rich nutrient content including many vitamins c e k and folate minerals potassium calcium and selenium and carotenoids lutein betacarotene and zeaxanthin cruciferous vegetables also contain glucosinolates the substances that give these greens their characteristic pungent flavor these substances have been found to bring diverse health benefits some glucosinolates seem to regulate the bodys stress and inflammation response they have antimicrobial properties and some of them are being investigated for their anticancer potential one recent study covered on mnt found that leafy greens including some cruciferous vegetables such as kale and collard greens helped to slow down cognitive decline consequently the study researchers suggest that `` adding a daily serving of green leafy vegetables to your diet may be a simple way to foster your brain health '' kale broccoli and cabbage have also been shown to have a protective effect on heart health thanks to their vitamin k content finally cruciferous vegetables are also a great source of soluble fiber which plays a role in regulating blood sugar levels and diminishing the absorption of fat thus helping to prevent excess weight gain salmon recent studies have suggested that consumption of meat mostly red meat but also some kinds of poultry meat could be harmful to our health in the long run a good alternative for protein in this case is fish and salmon in particular affords many nutritional benefits salmon could protect cognitive health researchers say salmon is packed with protein and also contains plenty of omega3 fatty acids which is said to be beneficial for eyesight research has demonstrated that omega3 protects against dryeye syndrome characterized by insufficient lubrication of the eyes which can lead to soreness and blurred vision moreover omega3 fatty acids have been associated with brain health and research suggests that they can stave off cognitive decline associated with aging salmon also has a high potassium content and according to a new study reported on mnt last autumn potassium can prevent the onset of heart disease additionally this type of fish is rich in the mineral selenium which contributes to the health of the thyroid gland the thyroid gland helps to regulate hormonal activity and is involved in metabolic processes what are the best diets for 2018 learn which diets researchers recommend for a healthy life read now although both farmed and wild salmon are available on the market wild salmon has been found to be more nutritious overall with a higher protein content and also to have less saturated fat which means that it is more healthful and better for weight management however farmed salmon is a more sustainable resource and specialists say that the differences between farmed and wild caught salmon may not be so stark as to motivate us to prefer one type over the other citrus fruits finally citrus fruits are the unsung heroes of a healthful diet these include a number of fruits that are now available worldwide such as oranges grapefruit lemons limes clementines mandarins and tangerines the flavonoids in citrus fruits have been cited in connection to longer lifespans for a long time citrus fruits have been recommended by nutritionists and grandmothers alike for their high content of vitamin c which has antioxidant properties and is said to bring a wide array of health benefits including to reduce inflammatory damage and to fend off infections specialists point out however that this type of fruits goes well beyond just vitamin c when it comes to nutritional content '' the fruits are abundant in other macronutrients including sugars dietary fiber potassium folate calcium thiamin niacin vitamin b6 phosphorus magnesium copper riboflavin and pantothenic acid '' if this list of dietary goodies hasnt colored you impressed the specialists then go on to explain how citrus fruits contain even more organic compounds such as flavonoids coumarins and carotenoids that have been said to have protective effects against cancer cardiovascular diseases and neurodegenerative diseases research has shown that flavonoids in which citrus fruits are particularly rich can `` prevent or delay chronic diseases caused by obesity '' flavonoids have also garnered a lot of scientific attention for their anticancer potential and consumption of especially flavonoidrich citrus fruits has been associated with a significantly prolonged lifespan the inhabitants of the japanese prefecture of okinawa known to be some of the longestliving populations of the world regularly eat shikuwasa also known as `` shequasar '' a citrus fruit typical of the region which contains more flavonoids than most other citrus fruits drinking shikuwasa juice rich in flavonoid content has also been linked to better liver health although all of the foods mentioned above are appreciated for their significant health benefits we should not forget that wellbeing and longevity can not be achieved without a balanced inclusive diet and a healthful lifestyle moreover current studies suggest that our genetic makeup may have an important say as to which foods work best for our health so keeping our list of nutritious foods in mind make sure you follow the healthful diet that is most effective for youwhen it comes to new years resolutions eating better is at the top of our list but which diet plan is the best a panel of health experts on behalf of us news world report reveal the toprated diets for 2018 us news world report reveal the best diets for 2018 it is estimated that around 45 million people in the united states go on a diet each year with weight loss being the primary goal however whether youre dieting to lose weight or simply to improve overall health sticking to a specific eating plan can be challenging with so many diets to choose from how can you tell which one will work for you us news world report put together a panel of health experts every year to evaluate the most popular diets in the us this year the experts assessed 40 diets ranking them from lowest to highest in seven categories including the best diets for weight loss diabetes and heart health so we take a look at some of the key results the best diets for weight loss for the majority of dieters weight loss is the ultimate goal but losing weight and keeping it off is far from easy research suggests that approximately 30–35 percent of weight lost from dieting is regained within 1 year but it is possible to maintain weight loss its just a matter of finding the right eating plan the us news world report panel of experts evaluated 40 popular diets for their effects on both short and longterm weight loss noting that some people want to lose weight quickly while others want to maintain their weight loss for years to come the health experts rated weight watchers as the best diet on both accounts scoring 4 out of 5 for shortterm weight loss and 35 out of 5 for longterm weight loss a highfat diet without the weight gain study says its possible researchers say that there could be a way to avoid weight gain due to a highfat diet read now one of the longestrunning wellknown commercial diets weight watchers incorporates a points system wherein foods and beverages are assigned points based on their nutritional values and dieters are assigned a daily points allowance according to us news world report the expert panel `` appreciated the programs support system which helps dieters keep the pounds off '' the volumetrics diet came in at second place for best weight loss diet scoring 38 out of 5 for shortterm weight loss and 33 out of 5 for longterm weight loss designed by barbara rolls who is a professor of nutrition working at pennsylvania state university in centre county the volumetrics diet focuses on putting foods with lowenergy density such as lowfat milk grains and nonstarchy fruits and vegetables at the forefront of ones diet as well as limiting foods with highenergy density the best diets for heart health heart disease is the leading cause of death for men and women in the us killing around 610000 people in the country every year a poor diet can increase the risk of heart disease because eating food high in fat can lead to high blood pressure high cholesterol levels and obesity which are major risk factors for the condition but which eating plan is best for a healthy heart for this category the health experts analyzed each of the 40 diets and gave them average hearthealth ratings the dietary approaches to stop hypertension dash diet took first place in this category developed by the national heart lung and blood institute a part of the national institutes of health nih the dash diet is high in fruits vegetables whole grains fish poultry and lowfat dairy but it limits foods high in sugar and saturated and trans fats the dash diet was also ranked the best overall diet the mediterranean diet which emphasizes consuming fish and seafood at least twice weekly alongside regular consumption of fruits vegetables legumes and whole grains took joint second place for best hearthealthy diet alongside the ornish diet with the ornish diet fat is limited to 10 percent of daily calories and foods are divided into five groups from the least to most healthful the best diets for diabetes the mediterranean diet not only ranked highly for one of the best hearthealthy diets but it also took the crown for the best diabetes diet scoring 37 out of 5 it is estimated that around 303 million people in the us are living with diabetes wherein blood glucose levels become too high due to the bodys inability to produce or effectively use insulin although eating a healthful diet is important for all of us people with diabetes need to be extra cautious skipping meals or eating the wrong foods may lead to problematic highs and lows in blood glucose levels according to the panel `` the mediterranean diet is a great option for preventing or controlling diabetes some research has shown that diabetics on a mediterranean diet may improve their levels of hemoglobin a1c a measure of blood sugar over time '' the dash diet makes yet another appearance here ranking second in the best diabetes diet category with the experts noting that `` its menu looks a lot like widely accepted nutritional guidelines for those with the condition '' whichever eating plan that you decide is best for you its important to note that physical activity is just as important as the foods you eat current guidelines recommend that adults should engage in at least 150 minutes of moderateintensity or 75 minutes of vigorousintensity aerobic activity every weeka small pilot study of older people suggests that taking a daily supplement of a nutrient that is present naturally in foods may improve artery health and blood pressure a certain type of supplement may promote healthy arterial aging and reduced blood pressure the researchers at the university of colorado boulder found that the supplement called nicotinamide riboside mimics some of the effects of caloric restriction and activates several identical biological pathways studies of caloric restriction which have been done mainly in rodents and fruit flies and not so much in humans indicate that reducing daily calorie intake by a third may delay the aging process and lengthen lifespan the new study found that taking nicotinamide riboside supplements significantly improved blood pressure in people with mild hypertension or elevated blood pressure should the results be confirmed in a larger clinical trial the researchers think that they could have important implications in biomedicine such as increasing treatment options for elevated blood pressure elevated blood pressure and stage 1 high blood pressure are now defined as a blood pressure of 12080 or 13989 millimeters of mercury respectively which although is not high enough to justify medication is high enough to raise the risk for a heart attack or stroke currently the recommended options for people with elevated blood pressure include changes to diet and increasing physical activity senior study author doug seals who is a professor and researcher in the department of integrative physiology and his colleagues report their findings in a paper due to be published in the journal nature communications stiff arteries blood pressure and aging in a western culture stiffer arteries and the high blood pressure that results from them as we age is so common that it is accepted as a normal consequence of aging for example the american heart associations aha explanation of high blood pressure states `` the normal aging process can cause the big elastic arteries to become stiff over time '' in the united states an estimated 103 million adults have high blood pressure and this figure is expected to rise as the population continues to age however there is evidence that stiff arteries and high blood pressure are not necessarily a normal consequence of aging although genetics plays a role preserving artery health as we reach our 70s and beyond also depends on things that we can do something about such as lifestyle and diet nicotinamide riboside nicotinamide riboside is a trace nutrient present in certain foods such as cows milk and in higher concentrations in dietary supplement form studies have indicated that the nutrient contains `` unique properties as a vitamin b3 '' that include raising insulin sensitivity boosting the effects of exercise protecting the brain and resisting the harmful effects of a highfat diet high cholesterol in late life may mean better brain health learn how having a total cholesterol level higher in later life than it was in midlife is linked to a lower risk of marked cognitive decline read now for their study prof seals and his colleagues recruited 24 lean and healthy men and women from the boulder area their ages ranged from 55 to 79 and they were put into two groups one of the groups took 500 milligrams of nicotinamide riboside chloride twice per day for 6 weeks then spent another 6 weeks taking a placebo the other group followed the opposite pattern they took a placebo for 6 weeks and then a twicedaily 500milligram dose of nicotinamide riboside chloride for another 6 weeks the team analyzed blood samples that the subjects gave at the end of each treatment period and they took other `` physiological measurements '' at these times there were no serious side effects an evolutionary survival mechanism the results showed that taking 1000 milligrams of nicotinamide riboside each day increased levels of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide nad+ by 60 percent nad+ is a compound that activates sirtuins a group of enzymes thought to be responsible for the beneficial effects that calorie restriction has on healthy aging and longevity the compound levels of which tend to wane with age is involved in many of the bodys metabolic processes there is a theory which is supported by research that our bodies are programmed by evolution to conserve nad+ when food is scarce and that this is activated when we restrict calorie intake more recent research has also begun to investigate the possibility that older adults might regain this protective property and age more healthily by taking supplements of `` nad+ precursors '' such as nicotinamide riboside the results also found that nicotinamide riboside supplementation caused a drop in systolic blood pressure of 10 points in 13 of the participants who had elevated blood pressure or stage 1 high blood pressure this represents a 25 percent reduction in the risk of having a heart attack more work now needed to confirm findings the researchers conclude that their paper is a step forward in highlighting the potential benefits of nicotinamide riboside supplementation in older adults however they point out that there is still a lot of work to do to confirm that it is safe and effective they hope to investigate the specific impact of nicotinamide riboside on artery health and blood pressure more robustly in a larger clinical trial in the meantime another trial is about to investigate the effect of the supplement in older people with mild cognitive impairment a condition that often precedes alzheimers disease '' this was the first ever study to give this novel compound to humans over a period of time we found that it is welltolerated and appears to activate some of the same key biological pathways that calorie restriction does '' prof doug seals the study was partfunded by chromadex who make the supplements that the researchers usedapps are available for everything these days from shopping to entertainment and travel apps that claim to help look after your mental health and wellbeing are also available so we have selected the best apps for mental health mental health apps may help with conditions such as anxiety and depression as well as enhance psychological wellbeing approximately 483 million adults in the united states are faced with a mental health condition each year and 98 million of those are serious conditions that limit the activities of everyday life among us adults aged 18–44 mood disorders such as depression and bipolar disorder are now the third most common reason for hospitalizations furthermore those who live with severe mental illness are more likely to face chronic medical conditions and die around 25 years earlier exercising regularly and eating a healthful diet can boost mental health and wellbeing significantly help to reduce symptoms of depression anxiety and stress and increase endorphins responsible for happiness apps focus on protecting or improving mental health using methods including meditation hypnosis cognitive behavioral therapy cbt and providing a valuable support network medical news today have put together a list of the top 10 apps that can help to enhance your wellbeing and look after your mental health calm android free iphone free calm was branded as apples `` app of the year '' in 2017 the app is designed to reduce anxiety improve sleep and help you to feel happier calm focuses on the four key areas of meditation breathing sleep and relaxation with the aim of bringing joy clarity and peace to your daily life the app delivers meditations that can help you to destress as well as breathing programs music and sounds from nature to relax your mind and body and promote better sleep calm is the perfect app if you are new to meditation but it also offers programs for more advanced users meditation sessions are available in lengths of 3–25 minutes to fit in with your schedule headspace android free iphone free headspace uses mindfulness and meditation to help you perform at your best each day the apps mission is to provide you with the essential tools to achieve a happier healthier life whether you need to build healthier relationships find a place of calm keep your mind fit or reduce stress headspace has hundreds of themed mindfulness and meditation sessions to support you the app reports that meditation reduces daily stress and improves focus and attention what is more using headspace is suggested to enhance compassionate behavior toward others in just 3 weeks moodnotes iphone $ 399 moodnotes is a thought journal and mood diary the app can be used to capture your feelings and improve your thinking habits through the implementation of cbt and positive psychology track your mood and increase selfawareness of what influences it learn to recognize `` traps '' in your thinking and ways to rethink the situation if you happen to enter a `` thinking trap '' moodnotes will provide suggestions and useful perspectives to reduce stress and enhance wellbeing progress is viewable in the helpful `` insights '' dashboard googleadslotinfopush { '' slotname '' mnt_dlb1 '' slotcontainer '' mnt_dlb1_container } moodpath android free iphone free moodpath is your pocketsized mental health companion whether you are facing a rough patch or have concerns about your mental health the apps goal is to support you through the difficult times and guide you out the other side moodpath asks daily questions in order to assess your wellbeing and screen for symptoms of depression the screening progress aims to increase your awareness of your thoughts emotions and feelings after a period of 2 weeks the app generates an electronic document that you can discuss with a healthcare professional more than 150 videos and psychological exercises are available to help you understand your mood and strengthen your mental health pacifica android free iphone free pacifica is an app with anxiety and stress in mind it provides a toolbox to deal with daily anxiety and stress along with a highly supportive community of likeminded individuals pacifica helps you to break cycles of unhelpful thoughts feelings and behaviors through methods such as cbt mindfulness meditation mood tracking and relaxation the app houses audio lessons and activities that help you to cope with stress and depression and it sets daily challenges to help you tackle anxiety one day at a time and reach your longterm goals superbetter android free iphone free superbetter is a game focusing on increasing resilience and the ability to remain strong optimistic and motivated when presented with challenging obstacles in life a study by the university of pennsylvania in philadelphia found that when people played superbetter for 30 days their mood improved symptoms of anxiety and depression decreased and selfbelief to achieve goals increased the app will help you to adopt new habits improve your skills strengthen relationships complete meaningful projects and achieve lifelong dreams superbetter also has the potential to help you beat depression and anxiety cope with chronic illness and recover from posttraumatic stress disorder ptsd 7 cups android free iphone free if you are feeling lonely sad stressed or worried 7 cups could be the perfect app for you it provides online therapy and emotional support for anxiety and depression there are more than 160000 trained listeners and licensed therapists who are available to anonymously speak with 247 speak your mind and confide in listeners without the fear of being judged these listeners can be searched for based on their experience or their specialties such as bullying panic attacks eating disorders relationship breakups and many more affordable therapy with an online therapist can commence onetoone in a confidential setting anxiety relief hypnosis android free iphone free anxiety relief hypnosis is an app suggested to help improve relaxation and reduce anxiety within just 1–3 weeks of use the apps developers say that hypnosis can decrease anxious thoughts and enhance your response to relaxation which in turn resets your behavior and enables an improved response to stress the app provides an audio session read by a certified hypnotherapist together with calming music and sounds from nature to aid relaxation the `` awaken at end '' feature can be disabled to allow you to fall into restful sleep at bedtime happify android free iphone free happify is a space to overcome negative thoughts and stress and build resilience whether you are feeling stressed anxious or sad happify helps you to regain control of your thoughts and feelings in fact 86 percent of the apps users report feeling better about their lives after 2 months of using it happify employs techniques and evidencebased interventions in the areas of cbt positive psychology and mindfulness to help you break old and unhealthful patterns and form new healthful habits the app offers activities and games to improve your life satisfaction and ability to fight negativity your emotional wellbeing is calculated as a happiness score that you can improve upon each week talkspace android free iphone free talkspace is a counseling and therapy app that connects users with a convenient affordable and confidential way to deal with anxiety stress depression relationship issues and chronic illness a free consultation is provided with a matching agent to identify the ideal therapist for your needs based on several factors more than 1000 licensed therapists are available who specialize in anxiety phobia depression domestic violence ptsd and more after upgrading and becoming a member access is given to a secure chat room wherein you can raise and discuss your worries with your private counselor the apps pricing plans are described as being approximately 80 percent lower than traditional officebased appointments how to be happy in 2018 find out how to maintain your happiness this year read nowcancer is the leading cause of death across the globe for years now researchers have led meticulous studies focused on how to stop this deadly disease in its tracks how close are we to finding more effective treatments how far has cancer research come the world health organization who note that worldwide nearly 1 in 6 deaths are down to cancer in the united states alone the national cancer institute nci estimated 1688780 new cancer cases and 600920 cancerrelated deaths in 2017 currently the most common types of cancer treatment are chemotherapy radiotherapy tumor surgery and in the case prostate cancer and breast cancer hormonal therapy however other types of treatment are beginning to pick up steam therapies that on their own or in combination with other treatments are meant to help defeat cancer more efficiently and ideally have fewer side effects innovations in cancer treatment aim to address a set of issues that will typically face healthcare providers and patients including aggressive treatment accompanied by unwanted side effects tumor recurrence after treatment surgery or both and aggressive cancers that are resilient to widely utilized treatments below we review some of the most recent cancer research breakthroughs that give us renewed hope that better therapies and prevention strategies will soon follow suit boosting the immune systems arsenal one type of therapy that has attracted a lot of attention recently is immunotherapy which aims to reinforce our own bodies existing arsenal against foreign bodies and harmful cells our immune systems response to the spread of cancer tumors but many types of cancer cell are so dangerous because they have ways of `` duping '' the immune system either into ignoring them altogether or else into giving them a `` helping hand '' lung cancer tumor growth halved with new approach to stop cancer from spreading we may have to look at mysterious noncoding molecules a recent study suggests read now therefore some types of aggressive cancer are able to spread more easily and become resistant to chemotherapy or radiotherapy however thanks to in vitro and in vivo experiments researchers are now learning how they might be able to `` deactivate '' the cancer cells protective systems a study published last year in nature immunology found that macrophages or white blood cells that are normally tasked with `` eating up '' cellular debris and other harmful foreign `` objects '' failed to obliterate the superaggressive cancer cells that was because in their interaction with the cancer cells the macrophages read not one but two signals meant to repel their `` cleansing '' action this knowledge however also showed the scientists the way forward by blocking the two relevant signaling pathways they reenabled the white blood cells to do their work therapeutic viruses and innovative vaccines a surprising weapon in the fight against cancer could be therapeutic viruses as revealed by a team from the united kingdom earlier this year in their experiments they managed to use a reovirus to attack brain cancer cells while leaving healthy cells alone '' this is the first time it has been shown that a therapeutic virus is able to pass through the brainblood barrier '' explained the study authors which `` opens up the possibility that this type of immunotherapy could be used to treat more people with aggressive brain cancers '' another area for improvement in immunotherapy is `` dendritic vaccines '' a strategy wherein dendritic cells which play a key role in the bodys immune response are collected from a persons body `` armed '' with tumorspecific antigens which will teach them to `` hunt '' and destroy relevant cancer cells and injected back into the body to boost the immune system in a new study researchers in switzerland identified a way to improve the action of these dendritic vaccines by creating artificial receptors able to recognize and `` abduct '' tiny vesicles that have been linked to cancer tumors spread in the body by attaching these artificial receptors to the dendritic cells in the `` vaccines '' the therapeutic cells are enabled to recognize harmful cancer cells with more accuracy importantly recent studies have shown that immunotherapy may work best if delivered in tandem with chemotherapy specifically if the chemotherapy drugs are delivered first and they are followed up with immunotherapy but this approach does have some pitfalls it is difficult to control the effects of this combined method so sometimes healthy tissue may be attacked alongside cancer tumors however scientists from two institutions in north carolina have developed a substance that once injected into the body becomes gellike a `` bioresponsive scaffold system '' the scaffold can hold both chemotherapy and immunotherapy drugs at once releasing them systematically into primary tumors this method allows for a better control of both therapies ensuring that the drugs act on the targeted tumor alone the nanoparticle revolution speaking of specially developed tools for delivering drugs straight to the tumor and hunting down micro tumors with accuracy and efficiency the past couple of years have seen a `` boom '' in nanotechnology and nanoparticle developments for cancer treatments nanoparticles could be a gamechanger in cancer treatment nanoparticles are microscopic particles that have garnered so much attention in clinical research among other fields because they bring us the chance to develop precise less invasive methods of tackling disease vitally they can target cancer cells or cancer tumors without harming healthy cells in the surrounding environment some nanoparticles have now been created to provide very focused hyperthermic treatment which is a type of therapy that uses hot temperatures to make cancer tumors shrink last year scientists from china and the uk managed to come up with a type of `` selfregulating '' nanoparticle that was able to expose tumors to heat while avoiding contact with healthy tissue '' this could potentially be a gamechanger in the way we treat people who have cancer '' said one of the researchers in charge of this project these tiny vehicles can also be used to target cancer stemlike cells which are undifferentiated cells that have been linked to the resilience of certain types of cancer in the face of traditional treatments such as chemotherapy thus nanoparticles can be `` loaded '' with drugs and set to `` hunt down '' cancer stem cells to prevent the growth or recurrence of tumors scientists have experimented with drugfilled nanoparticles in the treatment of various types of cancer including breast cancer and endometrial cancer no less importantly minuscule vehicles called `` nanoprobes '' can be used to detect the presence of micrometastases which are secondary tumors so tiny that they can not be seen using traditional methods dr steven k libutti director of the rutgers cancer institute of new jersey in new brunswick calls micrometastases `` the achilles heel of surgical management for cancer '' and argues that nanoprobes `` go a long way to solving such problems '' tumor starvation strategies another type of strategy that researchers have been investigating of late is that of `` starving '' tumors of the nutrients they need to grow and spread this scientists point out could be a saving grace in the case of aggressive resilient cancers that can not effectively be eradicated otherwise one novel method of attacking cancer is by starving cancer cells to death three different studies whose results were all published in january this year looked at ways of cutting off cancers nutritional supplies one of these studies looked at ways of stopping glutamine a naturally occurring amino acid from feeding cancer cells certain cancers such as breast lung and colon are known to use this amino acid to support their growth by blocking cancer cells access to glutamine the researchers managed to maximize the impact of oxidative stress a process that eventually induces cell death on these cells some aggressive types of breast cancer may be halted by stopping the cells from `` feeding '' on a particular enzyme that helps them to produce the energy they need to thrive another way of depleting cancer cells of energy is by blocking their access to vitamin b2 as researchers from the university of salford in the uk have observed as one study author says `` this is hopefully the beginning of an alternative approach to halting cancer stem cells '' this strategy could help individuals receiving cancer treatment to avoid the toxic side effects of chemotherapy cancer treatments and epigenetics epigenetics refers to the changes caused in our bodies by alterations in gene expression which dictate whether certain characteristics appear or if certain `` actions '' are affected at a biological level according to research that addressed the impact of such changes many cancers as well as the behaviors of cancer cells are determined by epigenetic factors '' recent advances in the field of epigenetics have shown that human cancer cells harbor global epigenetic abnormalities in addition to numerous genetic alterations '' '' these genetic and epigenetic alterations interact at all stages of cancer development working together to promote cancer progression '' thus it is crucial for specialists to understand when and where to intervene and the expression of which genes they may need to switch on or off depending on their role in the development of cancer one study for instance found that the gene responsible for the advent of huntingtons disease produces a set of molecules whose action may actually prevent cancer from occurring now the researchers challenge is to channel the therapeutic potential of this process without triggering huntingtons disease however the scientists are hopeful '' we believe a shortterm treatment cancer therapy for a few weeks might be possible '' says the studys senior author another recent study was able to establish that estrogenreceptor positive breast cancers that become resistant to chemotherapy gain their resilience through genetic mutations that `` confer a metastatic advantage to the tumor '' but this knowledge also gave researchers the `` break '' that they needed to come up with an improved treatment for such stubborn tumors a combination therapy that delivers the chemotherapeutic drug fulvestrant alongside an experimental enzyme inhibitor what does this all mean cancer research is running at full speed taking advantage of all the technological advances that science has achieved over recent years but what does that mean in terms of coming up with a cure for cancer whether or not there will ever be a cure for all cancer types is currently a matter of strong debate although promising studies are published and covered by the media almost every day cancer types vary immensely this makes it very difficult to say that an approach that works for one type will be adaptable to all also while there is much emerging research promising more effective treatments most of these projects are still in their early stages having conducted in vitro and in vivo experiments some potential treatments still have a long way to go before clinical trials in human patients still that doesnt mean we should lose all hope some researchers explain that these efforts should make us optimistic while we may not be at the stage where we can claim that cancer can easily be eradicated our furthered knowledge and ever more precise tools keep us ahead of the game and improve our odds in the fight against this diseasenew research published in the journal aging finds a compound that stops cancer cells from spreading by starving them of vitamin b2 the findings may revolutionize traditional chemotherapy current chemotherapy has a wide range of serious side effects but that may be about to change suggests new research a team of britishbased researchers set out to find a nontoxic therapeutic agent that targets the mitochondria of cancer cells mitochondria are energyproducing organelles found inside each cell the compound recently found by the scientists can stop cancer stemlike cells from proliferating by interfering with their energycreating process inside the mitochondria the team was led by prof michael lisanti the chair of translational medicine at the university of salford in the united kingdom and the new study can be accessed here starving cancer cells of energy prof lisanti and his colleagues used drugscreening to identify the compound which is called diphenyleneiodonium chloride dpi as the researchers explain various cell assays and other cell culture experiments revealed that dpi reduced over 90 percent of the energy produced in the cells mitochondria dpi achieved this by blocking vitamin b2 also known as riboflavin which depleted the cells of energy '' our observation is that dpi is selectively attacking the cancer stem cells by effectively creating a vitamin deficiency in other words by turning off energy production in cancer stem cells we are creating a process of hibernation '' prof michael lisanti the cancer stem cells are the ones that produce the tumor `` its extraordinary '' continues prof lisanti `` the cells just sit there as if in a state of suspended animation '' importantly dpi proved to be nontoxic for socalled `` bulk '' cancer cells which are largely thought to be nontumorigenic is chemo at the heart of cancer regrowth paradoxically the very treatment that is supposed to stop cancer from spreading sometimes enables it to do so read now this suggests that the compound might be successful where current chemotherapy fails the team explains `` dpi treatment can be used to acutely confer a mitochondrialdeficient phenotype which we show effectively depletes cancer stemlike cells from the heterogeneous cancer cell population '' '' these findings have significant therapeutic implications for potently targeting cancer stemlike cells while minimizing toxic side effects '' they add a new era of chemotherapy '' we believe '' say the scientists `` that dpi is one of the most potent and highly selective cancer stemlike cells inhibitors discovered to date '' the findings are particularly significant given the dire need for nontoxic cancer therapies and the serious side effects of conventional chemotherapy '' the beauty of dpi is that it makes the cancer stem cells metabolically inflexible so that they will be highly susceptible to many other drugs '' explains prof lisanti study coauthor prof federica sotgia also comments on the significance of the recent findings saying `` in terms of chemotherapies for cancer we clearly need something better than what we have at present and this is hopefully the beginning of an alternative approach to halting cancer stem cells '' in fact the authors specialize in finding alternative nontoxic therapies and they hope that their most recent findings will mark the beginning of a new era of chemotherapy perhaps one that uses nontoxic molecules to target the mitochondrial activity of cancer stemlike cells the researchers propose to call these new molecules `` mitoflavoscins ''periods usually arrive once each month but the exact date flow cramp severity and accompanying symptoms are not quite that consistent for this very reason the app market is flooded with period trackers that aim to offer insight into your monthly cycle period tracking apps can help you to learn more about your cycle and plan for future periods bleeding occurs every 28 days for the majority of women but it is common for the menstrual cycle to be either shorter or longer in duration and for bleeding to start anywhere from day 21 to day 40 period length may also vary and last for 3–8 days with an average of 5 days bleeding is often heaviest on days 1 and 2 and starts to become lighter thereafter tracking your period can be useful for several reasons period tracking can help you to get to know your own body and cycle and observe any symptoms such as mood swings or headaches that may occur during a particular phase of your cycle period tracking can help to identify any changes to your menstrual cycle that may be an indicator of potential health issues furthermore using period tracking apps can tell you when you are likely to be most fertile if you are avoiding pregnancy or trying to become pregnant there are hundreds of apps that track and analyze the menstrual cycle so how do you know which one is the best fit for you medical news today have tried and tested apps galore to bring you a selection of the top 10 apps to start tracking your period today period calendar android free iphone free period calendar can help to track and predict your period plus provide information on your fertile window and potential ovulation date in addition to the basic menstrual cycle tracking function the app can be used to record temperature intercourse birth control weight cervical mucus mood and any other symptoms the pill reminder ensures that you will never forget a dose ever again whether you need to remember to take medications supplements birth control pills or even an injection the pill tracker can be set up to remind you flo period tracker android free iphone free if you are wondering when you last had a period or would like to know when your next one is due you can easily find out using flo flo uses machine learning to accurately and reliably predict menstruation and ovulation using the apps bold and simple calendar you will be able to log how you are feeling your symptoms sex drive and menstruation flow the app can also be used to track sleep water consumption and physical activity the insights dashboard helps you to learn more about your body and cycle and it also provides personalized health insights each day clue android free iphone free clue has been ranked as the top period and ovulation tracking app by the obstetrics gynecology journal which is a publication of the american college of obstetricians and gynecologists clue uses science to help its users to identify unique patterns in their menstrual cycle with the apps period tracker multiple mood trackers health logs and exercise trackers your health and menstrual cycle will no longer be a mystery the developers promise to be inclusive of all ages and never use butterflies flowers euphemisms or pink the apps unique algorithm learns from the data that you add which means that the more you use clue the smarter it will become my calendar android free iphone free my calendar is a sophisticated elegant and very customizable period tracker it can help those with irregular cycles as well as people who have worries about conceiving birth control and contraception with my calendar you can track regular and irregular periods temperature weight moods symptoms and blood flow with its discreet reminders you can be prepared for approaching periods along with ovulation and fertile days you can access all your essential information using the health tracker at a glance and the calendar can be passwordprotected to ensure that your information remains private glow android free iphone free glow can track your period and record your symptoms mood sexual activity and medications glows datadriven menstrual and ovulation calculator helps women to take control of their reproductive health the app can forecast periods and ovulation and its predictions become smarter over time not only can the app help women who are avoiding or attempting pregnancy but it also helps those who are undergoing fertility treatments such as intrauterine insemination and in vitro fertilization you can make charts of your menstrual and fertility data set medication birth control and ovulation reminders as well as log more than 40 different health signals glow also offers a subscription to unlock comparative insights premium articles private messaging and premium support eve android free iphone free eve is a savvy period tracker that predicts upcoming periods and your chances of pregnancy discover trends in your cycle by logging your moods and symptoms and view your health data in eyecatching charts with eve you can review past periods forecast future periods and ovulation and visualize your cycle history in a new way with eves interactive staircase the app provides access to a community where you can discuss periods sex and health if you are concerned about anything at all ask the community no subject is off limits and you can learn from those who have had similar experiences period tracker lite android free iphone free the period tracker lite app makes logging menstrual cycles quick and easy press a button at the start of each period and period tracker lite will record your data and use the average of 3 months worth of data to calculate your next period take notes each day about your symptoms such as flow cramps bloating backache headache and tender breasts your weight temperature and a choice of more than 30 moods can also be selected period dates fertility days and ovulation are all shown in a simple monthview calendar the app provides comprehensive charts that illustrate weight changes temperature period length cycle length and symptoms period plus iphone free period plus can help you to keep in touch with the duration of your menstrual cycles and tells you when the next one will begin the app sends you reminders of your next period and fertile window helping you to get to know your cycle and plan ahead with birth control pregnancy planning and even vacations period plus tracks period duration and intensity cramp intensity breast tenderness breakouts migraines basal body temperature cervical mucus sexual activity exercise pregnancy test results sleep patterns and more my cycles android free iphone free regardless of whether you are trying to conceive or become an expert on when your next period is due my cycles can help my cycles tracks periods in a handy calendar and predicts future ones wherever you are you can track your period symptoms mood and medications with my cycles in an instant record your periods view them at a glance with the easytoread calendar and plan periods fertile days and ovulation for the next 12 months if you are trying to get pregnant the app lets you know when your chances of conceiving are higher with helpful reminders likewise it tells you when to use extra protection if you are not trying to conceive cycles iphone free the cycles app is a simple period and fertility tracker that requires little input irrespective of having regular or irregular periods with cycles all you need to do is turn the dial on the first day of your period and thats it the app automatically adjusts your cycle length cycles is designed so that you can invite your partner to the app to keep up with your cycle this feature is useful so that your partner can provide emotional support plan trips and romantic evenings and know when your most fertile days are if you are trying to conceive the app uses scientifically backed fertility tracking that predicts fertility with an accuracy of up to 95 percent optional password protection keeps your information secure from prying eyes seven tips for relieving period bloating here are some tips about how to relieve periodrelating bloating read nowwant to get fit this year but dont know where to start we have chosen the best fitness blogs to empower you and help to get you started on your journey to tiptop physical fitness fitness blogs aim to inspire empower and motivate you to reach your health and fitness goals getting up off the couch and taking part in regular physical activity is one of the most important things you can do to ensure you remain healthy regular exercise can help to control your weight strengthen your bones and muscles and reduce your risk of cardiovascular disease type 2 diabetes and some cancers furthermore being active improves your mood mental health mobility and ability to complete tasks as an older adult as well as increases your chances of living longer adults are recommended to do at least 150 minutes of moderateintensity physical activity each week to achieve substantial health benefits and increase to 300 minutes for more extensive benefits if you are stuck on where to begin or are worried about getting injured the good news is that aerobic activity such as brisk walking is considered to be safe for most people hundreds of fitness blogs are also available to help you on your way and provide tips ideas and information on the best types of activity to boost fitness and instructions on how to do them medical news today have trawled through the many fitness blogs out there to bring you the top 10 fitness blogs for 2018 myfitnesspal blog myfitnesspal is a smartphone app and website that records physical activity and diet the app works out the optimal intake of calories and nutrients for the user to accomplish their goals and it uses elements of gaming to motivate them myfitnesspals blog focuses on providing easytoread information on eating psychology nutrition weight loss fitness inspiration workout guides and motivational support through the victory stories on the blog fitness posts include seven tips to lift weights without causing injury songs that should feature on your 2018 running playlist and brain and bodyboosting moves that you should add to your next walk visit the myfitnesspal blog natalie jill fitness natalie jill fitness was founded after natalie jill gained weight straight after losing her house retiring and ending her marriage she turned her life around and in the process became an inspiration to others natalie specializes in fitness weight loss healthy lifestyles and body weight training natalie coaches motivates and empowers people to stop making excuses and instead make solutions to become the best version of themselves recent posts on her blog include a bootybuilding workout to activate your glutes an upper body workout using just your body weight and how to do a chin up visit the natalie jill fitness blog ace ace is an acronym for the american council on exercise ace are a nonprofit organization that certifiy exercise professionals and health coaches aces vision is to get people moving and provide scientifically backed education to fitness professionals and health enthusiasts to make an impact on preventable diseases related to inactivity by 2035 their expert articles cover fitness topics such as exercises to improve agility lower body exercises to complete instead of doing squats and the many types of strength and their benefits visit the ace blog born fitness adam bornstein developed born fitness with the aim of taking the stress out of health nutrition and fitness whether you hope to lose weight gain muscle eat more healthfully or live longer born fitness provide solutions to fit your needs the born fitness team will help you to identify the diets strategies exercises and workouts that are best suited to you so that you can apply them to your life achieve your goals and live stronger and longer activities are available on the blog to suit all levels of fitness from beginner to advanced training posts include how to incorporate resistance bands into your routine preventing knee back and shoulder injuries during your workouts and the truth about the 7minute workout visit the born fitness blog the fitnessista the fitnessista is a healthy lifestyle blog written by gina harney who is a fitness instructor personal trainer and weight loss specialist based in san diego ca gina is a mom of two and she shares snippets of her family life on the blog along with quick effective workouts and healthful recipes that are super speedy to put together the latest posts on the fitnessista include things to help with fitness motivation the barre hiit workout that you can practice anywhere and a strength and cardio workout that can be completed on a park bench visit the fitnessista blog suzanne bowen fitness suzanne bowen compiled all of the training that she had received and given over the course of 16 years and created suzanne bowen fitness suzanne is also the creator of barreamped which is an internationally taught barre fitness technique regardless of whether you havent exercised for a while or if you are a seasoned expert suzanne has workouts that range from 10 minutes to over an hour that are effective for everyone the blog provides challenges and workouts to boost your fitness levels such as the crunchless abs workout a light weight routine for the upper body and a rebounding workout and its benefits visit the suzanne bowen fitness blog knockedup fitness erica ziel is a mother of three and the founder of knockedup fitness erica is a personal trainer and expert for fitnessinfused pilates with more than 10 years experience training numerous clients erica is an expert in prenatal and postnatal training and teaching women how to strengthen their core muscles for an easier pregnancy delivery and recovery the knockedup fitness blog delivers real and relevant topics to the busy mom or momtobe with articles such as why its important to properly strengthen your core how to prevent and relieve back pain during pregnancy and how movement can prepare your body for birth visit the knockedup fitness blog lisa gulley established workout mommy in 2007 to provide health and fitness information for moms lisa says that as a mom of four boys she is fully aware of how being a mom requires you to look after someone other than yourself 247 and that finding the time to exercise is a challenge lisa aims to provide the inspiration motivation and ideas you need to fit fitness exercise and health into your busy schedule and keep your sanity in check posts on workout mommy include ways to overcome a negative mindset tips on how to start a fitness routine and the types of cardio exercises that are best for women visit the workout mommy blog love sweat fitness katie dunlop is a certified personal trainer group fitness instructor and the creator of love sweat fitness she started love sweat fitness with the aim of inspiring women all over the world to find their happy and healthy body after college katie found herself overweight by 45 pounds and was fed up with trendy workouts and fad diets she decided to take her fitness and health into her own hands lost her excess weight and identified her true passion for helping women to reach their goals inspiring posts on katies blog include ways to make your morning workout the best part of your day five tips for a happier and healthier you this year and how to train for a 10k run visit the love sweat fitness blog nerd fitness nerd fitness say that they are a community of misfits mutants and underdogs that are ready to help you on your fitness journey whether you are overweight and frustrated in danger of serious health issues want to become a healthier parent or just want to look after or feel better about yourself nerd fitness aim to help you to make small changes so that you can live a happier healthier and more fulfilling life blog posts include the main differences between weight loss success and failure the number of calories you burn while walking and how to get strong like logan with the wolverine workout visit the nerd fitness blog the 10 best fitness apps pair these blogs with the apps listed here to boost your chances of becoming fit and healthy read nowa new study may have revealed a possible new prevention and treatment strategy for osteoarthritis which is one of the most common and debilitating agerelated diseases in the united states researchers suggest that increasing levels of foxo proteins could be one way to prevent and treat osteoarthritis researchers at the scripps research institute tsri in san diego ca reveal that proteins called foxo are key for joint health by boosting the levels of these foxo proteins they believe that it might be possible to treat osteoarthritis or even stop the disease from developing senior study author dr martin lotz from the department of molecular medicine at tsri and his team recently reported their results in the journal science translational medicine osteoarthritis also referred to as degenerative joint disease is estimated to affect more than 30 million adults in the united states making it the most common type of arthritis the condition is characterized by a breakdown of cartilage which is the tissue that cushions the joints of the bones osteoarthritis most commonly affects the knee hip and hand joints in a previous study dr lotz and team found that foxo levels in joint cartilage are reduced for this latest study the researchers sought to find out more about how foxo proteins affect joint health the effects of foxo deficiency in mice the researchers reached their findings by studying mice that were lacking foxo proteins in their joint cartilage compared with control mice the scientists found that foxodeficient mice experienced degeneration of the joints at a significantly younger age what is more the rodents with foxo deficiency showed greater susceptibility to cartilage damage during a treadmill test and they were also more likely to develop posttraumatic osteoarthritis due to knee injury osteoarthritis could this algae extract lead to a cure researchers reveal how an algae extract may offer a cure for osteoarthritis read now upon further investigation the scientists found that the foxodeficient mice showed abnormalities in a process called autophagy which is a natural process by which cells get rid of any unwanted or damaged components in order to maintain their health and carry out any repairs foxo deficiency also led to abnormalities in the processes that protect our cells against damage caused by free radicals additionally the study revealed that mice lacking foxo proteins failed to produce the required levels of a protein called lubricin which helps to protect joint cartilage against wear and tear the reduced production of lubricin was linked to a reduction in healthy cells in the `` superficial zone '' which is a layer of cartilage in the knee joint boosting foxo may prevent osteoarthritis so why does foxo cause these issues the researchers found that foxo proteins regulate the expression of genes that are important for joint health including those that control inflammation and autophagy the absence of foxo proteins in the joint cartilage leads to an increase in inflammation and a decrease in autophagy meaning that cells are unable to repair any damage '' the housekeeping mechanisms which keep cells healthy were not working in these knockout mice '' says dr lotz for the final part of their study the scientists wanted to see whether boosting foxo levels could restore these `` housekeeping mechanisms '' by increasing foxo expression in cells taken from people with osteoarthritis the researchers were able to normalize the expression of genes associated with inflammation and autophagy and the production of lubricin was also restored the team now plans to create molecules that can increase foxo levels and assess their effects in experimental osteoarthritis models '' drugs that boost the expression and activity of foxo could be a strategy for preventing and treating osteoarthritis '' dr martin lotzaccording to the national institutes of health people have used marijuana or cannabis to treat their ailments for at least 3000 years however the food and drug administration have not deemed marijuana safe or effective in the treatment of any medical condition although cannabidiol a substance that is present in marijuana received approval in june 2018 as a treatment for some types of epilepsy marijuana is being increasingly legalized in the us but is it safe this tension between a widespread belief that marijuana is an effective treatment for a wide assortment of ailments and a lack of scientific knowledge on its effects has been somewhat exacerbated in recent times by a drive toward legalization twentynine states plus the district of columbia have now made marijuana available for medical and in some states recreational purposes a recent study published in the journal addiction also found that use of marijuana is increasing sharply across the united states although this rise may not be linked to the legalization of marijuana in participating states nevertheless this rise in use is prompting major public health concerns in this article we look at the scientific evidence weighing the medical benefits of marijuana against its associated health risks in an attempt to answer this simple question is marijuana good or bad what are the medical benefits of marijuana over the years research has yielded results to suggest that marijuana may be of benefit in the treatment of some conditions these are listed below chronic pain last year a large review from the national academies of sciences engineering and medicine assessed more than 10000 scientific studies on the medical benefits and adverse effects of marijuana one area that the report looked closely at was the use of medical marijuana to treat chronic pain chronic pain is a leading cause of disability affecting more than 25 million adults in the us the review found that marijuana or products containing cannabinoids which are the active ingredients in marijuana or other compounds that act on the same receptors in the brain as marijuana are effective at relieving chronic pain alcoholism and drug addiction another comprehensive review of evidence published last year in the journal clinical psychology review revealed that using marijuana may help people with alcohol or opioid dependencies to fight their addictions but this finding may be contentious the national academies of sciences review suggests that marijuana use actually drives increased risk for abusing and becoming dependent on other substances also the more that someone uses marijuana the more likely they are to develop a problem with using marijuana individuals who began using the drug at a young age are also known to be at increased risk of developing a problem with marijuana use depression posttraumatic stress disorder and social anxiety the review published in clinical psychology review assessed all published scientific literature that investigated the use of marijuana to treat symptoms of mental illness evidence to date suggests that marijuana could help to treat some mental health conditions its authors found some evidence supporting the use of marijuana to relieve depression and posttraumatic stress disorder symptoms that being said they caution that marijuana is not an appropriate treatment for some other mental health conditions such as bipolar disorder and psychosis the review indicates that there is some evidence to suggest that marijuana might alleviate symptoms of social anxiety but again this is contradicted by the national academies of sciences engineering and medicine review which instead found that regular users of marijuana may actually be at increased risk of social anxiety cancer evidence suggests that oral cannabinoids are effective against nausea and vomiting caused by chemotherapy and some small studies have found that smoked marijuana may also help to alleviate these symptoms alcohol more damaging to brain health than marijuana a recent study suggests that alcohol may cause more harm to the brain than marijuana read now some studies on cancer cells suggest that cannabinoids may either slow down the growth of or kill some types of cancer however early studies that tested this hypothesis in humans revealed that although cannabinoids are a safe treatment they are not effective at controlling or curing cancer multiple sclerosis the shortterm use of oral cannabinoids may improve symptoms of spasticity among people with multiple sclerosis but the positive effects have been found to be modest epilepsy in june 2018 the food and drug administration fda approved the use of a medication containing cannabidiol cbd to treat two rare severe and specific types of epilepsy called lennoxgastaut syndrome and dravet syndrome that are difficult to control with other types of medication this cbdbased drug is known as epidiolex cbd is one of many substances that occurs in cannabis it is not psychoactive the drug for treating these conditions involves a purified form of cbd the approval was based on the findings of research and clinical trials a study published in 2017 found that the use of cbd resulted in far fewer seizures among children with dravet syndrome compared with a placebo dravet syndrome seizures are prolonged repetitive and potentially lethal in fact 1 in 5 children with dravet syndrome do not reach the age of 20 years in the study 120 children and teenagers with dravet syndrome all of whom were aged between 2 and 18 were randomly assigned to receive an oral cbd solution or a placebo for 14 weeks along with their usual medication the researchers found that the children who received the cbd solution went from having around 12 seizures per month to an average of six seizures per month three children receiving cbd did not experience any seizures at all children who received the placebo also saw a reduction in seizures but this was slight their average number of seizures went down from 15 each month before the study to 14 seizures per month during the study the researchers say that this 39 percent reduction in seizure occurrence provides strong evidence that the compound can help people living with dravet syndrome and that their paper has the first rigorous scientific data to demonstrate this however the study also found a high rate of side effects linked to cbd more than 9 in 10 of the children treated with cbd experienced side effects most commonly vomiting fatigue and fever the patient information leaflet for epidiolex warns of side effects such as liver damage sedation and thoughts of suicide what are the health risks of marijuana at the other end of the spectrum is the plethora of studies that have found negative associations between marijuana use and health they are listed below mental health problems daily marijuana use is believed to exacerbate existing symptoms of bipolar disorder among people who have this mental health problem however the national academies of sciences engineering and medicine report suggests that among people with no history of the condition there is only limited evidence of a link between marijuana use and developing bipolar disorder moderate evidence suggests that regular marijuana users are more likely to experience suicidal thoughts and there is a small increased risk of depression among marijuana users marijuana use is likely to increase risk of psychosis including schizophrenia but a curious finding among people with schizophrenia and other psychoses is that a history of marijuana use is linked with improved performance on tests assessing learning and memory testicular cancer although there is no evidence to suggest any link between using marijuana and an increased risk for most cancers the national academies of sciences did find some evidence to suggest an increased risk for the slowgrowing seminoma subtype of testicular cancer respiratory disease regular marijuana smoking is linked to increased risk of chronic cough but `` it is unclear '' whether smoking marijuana worsens lung function or increases the risk of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or asthma a 2014 study that explored the relationship between marijuana use and lung disease suggested that it was plausible that smoking marijuana could contribute to lung cancer though it has been difficult to conclusively link the two the authors of that study published in the journal current opinion in pulmonary medicine conclude '' there is unequivocal evidence that habitual or regular marijuana smoking is not harmless a caution against regular heavy marijuana usage is prudent '' '' the medicinal use of marijuana is likely not harmful to lungs in low cumulative doses '' they add `` but the dose limit needs to be defined recreational use is not the same as medicinal use and should be discouraged '' so is marijuana good or bad for your health there is evidence that demonstrates both the harms and health benefits of marijuana yet despite the emergence over the past couple of years of very comprehensive uptodate reviews of the scientific studies evaluating the benefits and harms of the drug its clear that more research is needed to fully determine the public health implications of rising marijuana use more research is needed to confirm the harms and benefits of marijuana use many scientists and health bodies including the american cancer society acs support the need for further scientific research on the use of marijuana and cannabinoids to treat medical conditions however there is an obstacle to this marijuana is classed as a schedule i controlled substance by the drug enforcement administration which deters the study of marijuana and cannabinoids through its imposition of strict conditions on the researchers working in this area if you happen to live in a state where medical use of marijuana is legal you and your doctor will need to carefully consider these factors and how they relate to your illness and health history before using this drug for instance while there is some evidence to support the use for marijuana for pain relief you should certainly avoid marijuana if you have a history of mental health problems remember to always speak to your doctor before taking a new medicinewith so many diet types to choose from how do we know which one will suit us best one problem that may face us is deciding whether to go lowfat or lowcarb what does research have to say about it one of the most difficult decisions when it comes to weight loss diets is picking one that will work well for you keto diets mediterranean diets fasting diets there are so many options out there for people who want to lose weight however choosing a diet is tricky how do we know which one will work best for us or if the diet will work at all researchers at the stanford university school of medicine in california have recently conducted a study exploring one key aspect of this `` best diet '' question whether lowfat or lowcarb diets are more effective what lead study author prof christopher gardner and colleagues found however might only make the matter more complicated '' weve all heard stories '' says prof gardner `` of a friend who went on one diet it worked great and then another friend tried the same diet and it didnt work at all its because were all very different and were just starting to understand the reasons for this diversity '' '' maybe we shouldnt be asking whats the best diet but whats the best diet for whom '' prof christopher gardner prof gardner and team worked with 609 people aged 18–50 with an almost 5050 maletofemale ratio the participants were split into two groups and randomly assigned one of two diets lowcarb or lowfat all of the study participants followed their assigned diet for a full year the results of the researchers study are now published in the journal jama opt for natural foods in order to gain a better understanding of the factors that might drive weight gain and weight loss prof gardner and team also sequenced the participants genomes in doing so they looked for gene patterns that they could associate with the effectiveness fat or carb metabolism another test measured all the subjects insulin levels which have previously been associated with weight gain in some people cant keep the weight off this may be why why are our bodies so stubborn when it comes to weight management a new study sheds light read now for the first 8 weeks of their respective diets the participants were instructed to consume no more than 20 grams of either fats or carbs per day this the authors explain would be the equivalent of one and a half slices of wholewheat bread for carbs or a large handful of nuts in the case of fats from the second month of their diet onward the participants were allowed to make adjustments as needed adding back 5 –15 grams of either carbs or fat little by little the purpose of these adjustments was to encourage the participants to strike a nutritional balance that they would be comfortable adhering to in the long run beyond the `` confines '' of the study '' we wanted them to choose '' says prof gardner `` a lowfat or lowcarb diet plan that they could potentially follow forever rather than a diet that theyd drop when the study ended '' as the year drew to a close those who had been following a lowfat diet had a daily fat intake of 57 grams on average compared with 87 grams per day before the start of the study those on a lowcarb diet had a daily carb intake of approximately 132 grams versus 247 grams before the study started participants lost an average of 13 pounds over the 1year period the scientists were pleased with the impact that the study had on the participants dietary health stressing that one of its main achievements was to encourage them to switch to healthful sources of fats and carbs '' we made sure to tell everybody '' adds prof gardner `` regardless of which diet they were on to go to the farmers market and dont buy processed convenience food also we advised them to diet in a way that didnt make them feel hungry or deprived '' study opens the door to further questions after measuring participants baseline insulin levels and weight loss progress throughout the study the researchers saw that although they had all transitioned to more healthful eating habits there was still a lot of individual variance when it came to weight loss thus while some participants lost more than 60 pounds others gained 15–20 pounds however the researchers were unable to find any links between gene patterns or insulin output and a persons likelihood of thriving on a lowfat versus lowcarb diet '' this study closes the door on some questions but it opens the door to others we have gobs of data that we can use in secondary exploratory studies '' prof gardner notes the researchers next step from here therefore will be to look at all the different data collected throughout the current study and try to understand how individual dietary needs might be calculated in the future '' i still think there is an opportunity to discover some personalization to it now we just need to work on tying the pieces together '' says prof gardner in the meantime the researchers encourage people on a weight loss journey to just be more mindful about what they eat since that will be the first step to a more healthful lifestyle '' on both sides referring to lowcarb and lowfat dieters we heard from people who had lost the most weight that we had helped them change their relationship to food and that now they were more thoughtful about how they ate '' prof gardner concludesintermittent fasting has been gaining popularity among people looking to shed extra kilograms and maintain a healthy weight researchers argue that this type of diet may also slow down aging and disease intermittent fasting can help with weight management but might it also bring other health benefits in intermittent fasting what essentially takes place in the body is that one source of energy which can facilitate the accumulation of body fat is switched for another our bodies run on glucose or simple sugar but when we fast for a longer period of time that energy source becomes unavailable our system needs to identify a different kind of `` fuel '' that is when the body begins to convert certain types of body fat into fatty acids which are easily absorbed by the blood fatty acids in turn produce molecules called ketones which the body uses as its new source of energy stephen anton a researcher at the university of florida college of medicine in gainesville calls this process `` flipping the metabolic switch '' '' this switch '' explains anton `` can happen after a certain period of time fasting its a gradation in which your metabolism over time shifts to use higher and higher amounts of ketones for energy '' he and his team were interested to learn more about how this switch occurs and whether it could bring other health benefits alongside weight management for this purpose they reviewed numerous recent studies focused on the mechanisms and benefits of intermittent fasting the teams review published in the journal obesity suggests that intermittent fasting may be more healthful than other dieting strategies as ketones put less stress on cells than the byproducts of other dieting styles significant weight loss regardless of style anton and his colleagues explain that the switch usually begins to take place after 8–12 hours of fasting though in the case of individuals who practice intermittent fasting the fasting strategies vary the researchers focused on the two most common types of intermittent fasting diets the first of which is based on time restrictions for eating in it the dieter may fast for a number of hours per day for instance 16 hours while allowing themselves to eat anything theyd like over the remaining hours how intermittent fasting can increase weight loss how does intermittent fasting work read now for the second type of intermittent fasting dieters may choose to alternate days of total fasting with days when no food is off limits or they may simply alternate days of frugal eating when individuals limit themselves to foods that equal only about 500 calories in all with days of unrestricted eating or `` feasting days '' `` of course '' anton notes `` we recommend healthy food during the feasting times '' the teams review of existing studies revealed that all in all any type of intermittent fasting diets are associated with significant weight loss in all 10 clinical trials assessing the effects of alternateday fasting the results conclusively pointed to this strategys effectiveness when it came to shedding extra kilos and 3 out of the 4 studies focused on the restricted timing type of intermittent fasting had similar results '' so in my mind its not a question of whether it works for producing fat loss '' says anton whats more interesting and more important is what kind of tissue is lost through intermittent fasting additional potential health benefits most of the studies reviewed by anton and team revealed that while participants did lose body fat no significant amount of lean tissue which includes organ tissue muscular tissue and bone tissue was lost this is important since lean tissue allows our bodies to keep on functioning well and other types of dieting strategies anton notes lead to significant loss of both fat and lean tissue which may affect health in the long run studies into the effect of the switch from glucosedriven energy to ketonedriven energy in rodents and other animals suggests that intermittent fasting could also have other health benefits the scientists say the researchers say that it could help to prolong the lifespan improve the functioning of metabolic processes protect cognitive function enhance physical performance reduce harmful instances of inflammation and shield against cardiovascular diseases '' an important takeaway is that we all have the ability to switch our metabolism from glucose to ketone utilization and that switch has the potential to have profound health benefits for us in addition to the positive changes in body composition '' stephen anton still the authors warn against starting intermittent fasting without first asking for a doctors advice this dieting style may not be equally beneficial for everyone and in some cases it could do more harm than good he cautionsemerging evidence suggests that a `` potent '' drug could prevent the development of alzheimers disease but only if a person takes the medication long before symptoms of this condition make an appearance an existing drug may be able to stop alzheimers onset researchers say alzheimers disease is the most common form of dementia according to the centers for disease control and prevention cdc an estimated 57 million adults in the united states live with this condition unfortunately there is no cure for alzheimers and following disease onset symptoms tend to worsen progressively then the question `` can specialists prevent the disease in people deemed at increased risk '' arises the authors of a new study from the university of virginia in charlottesville suggest that one drug called memantine which is currently used to manage alzheimers symptoms may actually help prevent the disease this however might only happen if a person takes the drug before symptoms set in '' based on what weve learned so far it is my opinion that we will never be able to cure alzheimers disease by treating patients once they become symptomatic '' says prof george bloom of the university of virginia who oversaw the study '' the best hope for conquering this disease is to first recognize patients who are at risk and begin treating them prophylactically with new drugs and perhaps lifestyle adjustments that would reduce the rate at which the silent phase of the disease progresses '' he says adding `` ideally we would prevent it from starting in the first place '' the journal alzheimers dementia has now published the teams findings the cell cycle reentry process the researchers explain that alzheimers disease actually begins long before symptoms start to show perhaps even a decade or longer in advance one of the conditions characteristics is that once affected by the disease brain cells attempt to divide possibly in order to balance out the death of other neurons only to die anyway in any case the further division of fully formed brain cells is unusual and does not happen in a healthy brain the affected neurons attempt at division is called the `` cell cycle reentry process '' '' its been estimated that as much as 90 percent of neuron death that occurs in the alzheimers brain follows this cell cycle reentry process which is an abnormal attempt to divide '' explains prof bloom more potent alzheimers therapy is on its way recent advances in alzheimers research are speeding up the process of designing better therapies read now '' by the end of the course of the disease the patient will have lost about 30 percent of the neurons in the frontal lobes of the brain '' he estimates study coauthor erin kodis prof blooms former doctoral student formed her own hypothesis about what triggers this mechanism excess calcium she believes enters neurons through special receptors called nmda receptors on the cells surface this drives brain cells to start dividing following a series of laboratory experiments kodis confirmed that her hypothesis was correct this mechanism is set in motion before the formation of amyloid plaques which are characteristic of alzheimers disease in the brain eventually however molecules of an amino acid called beta amyloid stick together to form toxic amyloid plaques memantine may have potent properties kodis saw that when neurons encounter beta amyloid molecules in the early stages that precede plaque buildup nmda receptors open to receive the excess calcium that ultimately leads to their destruction but then the researcher made another discovery the drug memantine prevented cell cycle reentry by closing the nmda receptors on the surface of neurons '' the experiments suggest that memantine might have potent diseasemodifying properties if it could be administered to patients long before they have become symptomatic and diagnosed with alzheimers disease '' prof george bloom '' perhaps this could prevent the disease or slow its progression long enough that the average age of symptom onset could be significantly later if it happens at all '' prof bloom adds these findings are particularly promising memantine has few known side effects and those that have been reported are rare and do not have a major impact on an individuals wellbeing prof bloom believes that in the future a useful preventive approach might be to screen people for telling signs that they are exposed to alzheimers as early as possible specialists could then prescribe memantine to those at an increased risk of the disease he says people may have to take the drug throughout their lives to keep alzheimers at bay or at least in check '' i dont want to raise false hopes '' says prof bloom however he continues `` if this idea of using memantine as a prophylactic pans out it will be because we now understand that calcium is one of the agents that gets the disease started and we may be able to stop or slow the process if done very early '' currently prof bloom and colleagues are planning a clinical trial to test the preventive strategy that they outlined in the studyfor many cancers diagnosis is a long and challenging process a new blood test however could offer a muchneeded simpler and more effective diagnostic technique called cancerseek it has the potential to identify eight cancer types from one blood sample researchers have created a blood test that could detect eight cancer types in the new study researchers reveal how the blood test demonstrated high sensitivity and specificity for cancer detection in more than 1000 people with the disease the team from the johns hopkins university school of medicine in baltimore md recently published their results in the journal science worldwide cancer remains one of the leading causes of death it is estimated that by 2030 the number of cancer deaths will have risen from 8 million to 13 million early diagnosis is key to reducing cancerrelated deaths the earlier the disease is diagnosed the higher the chances of treatment success but sadly many cancers are not caught until the later stages and this is largely due to a lack of fast and effective diagnostic tools however the johns hopkins researchers believe that cancerseek could bring us closer to a quick simple way to detect cancer in its early stages test produced high sensitivity and specificity when cancerous tumors form they release small fragments of mutated dna and proteins into the bloodstream and these can act as markers for cancer the new blood test works by identifying the markers for 16 gene mutations and eight proteins that are associated with eight different cancer types these include breast lung and colorectal cancer as well as five cancers ovarian liver stomach pancreatic and esophageal for which there are currently no routine screening tests for people at average risk '' a novelty of our classification method is that it combines the probability of observing various dna mutations together with the levels of several proteins in order to make the final call '' explains study coauthor cristian tomasetti phd an associate professor of oncology and biostatistics at johns hopkins university how gum disease could lead to cancer researchers shed light on how gum disease can fuel cancer read now for their study the researchers tested cancerseek on 1005 individuals who had been diagnosed with nonmetastatic forms of one of the eight cancers they found that the test was able to identify 70 percent of the cancers with sensitivity ranging from 33 percent for breast cancer to 98 percent for ovarian cancer sensitivity ranged from 69 percent to 98 percent for the five cancers that currently have no routine screening tests the researchers report in terms of specificity the test yielded an overall result of more than 99 percent on testing cancerseek on 812 healthy adults it only produced seven falsepositive results as study coauthor kenneth kinzler phd codirector of the ludwig center for cancer genetics and therapeutics at johns hopkins notes `` very high specificity was essential because falsepositive results can subject patients to unnecessary invasive followup tests and procedures to confirm the presence of cancer '' what is more the researchers found that their test was able to pinpoint the location of tumors for 83 percent of patients test could substantially impact patients the researchers note that larger studies will now be needed to further determine the efficacy of cancerseek as a routine screening test for cancer and such studies are in the pipeline however the team believes that the results of its current research are encouraging '' this has the potential to substantially impact patients earlier detection provides many ways to improve outcomes for patients '' says study coauthor dr anne marie lennon phd who is an associate professor of medicine surgery and radiology at johns hopkins '' optimally cancers would be detected early enough that they could be cured by surgery alone but even cancers that are not curable by surgery alone will respond better to systemic therapies when there is less advanced disease '' she adds the team hopes that cancerseek will one day offer a simple noninvasive and fast strategy for diagnosing cancer in its early stages '' this test represents the next step in changing the focus of cancer research from late stage disease to early disease which i believe will be critical to reducing cancer deaths in the longterm '' study coauthor dr bert vogelstein johns hopkins university school of medicinethey are usually marketed as a safe alternative to conventional cigarettes but a new study suggests that ecigarettes may still pose serious harm to health researchers suggest that ecigarettes may increase the risk of cancer and heart disease researchers at the new york university school of medicine in new york city found that mice exposed to electronic cigaratte ecigarette vapor experienced dna damage in the lungs bladder and heart which could increase the risk of cancer and heart disease such damage was also found in cultured human lung and bladder cells that had been exposed to ecigarette vapor for the equivalent of 10 years study coauthor moonshong tang of the department of environmental medicine at the new york university school of medicine and his colleagues recently reported their findings in the proceedings of the national academy of sciences ecigarettes also known as ecigs have soared in popularity in recent years particularly among teenagers and young adults according to the centers for disease control and prevention cdc more than 2 million middle and high school students in the united states report having used ecigarettes in the past 30 days ecigarettes are not approved by the food and drug administration fda as a quitsmoking aid after the us preventive services task force concluded that there is `` insufficient evidence to recommend for or against their use for smoking cessation '' however research has found that more than 80 percent of smokers believe that ecigarettes could help them to quit while more than 97 percent believe that the batterypowered devices can help to reduce the use of conventional tobacco the debate over ecigarette safety when it comes to our health the cdc believe that ecigarettes are not as harmful as conventional ones still because ecigarettes are relatively new to the market precisely how harmful they are remains unclear that said we are learning more and more about the potential dangers of ecigarette use or `` vaping '' the pros and cons of ecigarettes revealed a new report details the potential benefits and risks of ecigarette use read now in 2017 medical news today reported on a study that linked the flavorings in ecigarette liquid to impaired heart muscle function a more recent report claims that there is `` substantial evidence '' that ecigarette use increases heart rate and that some chemicals in the vapor can harm dna the study by tang and team provides further evidence of the harms of ecigarettes after finding that exposure to ecigarette vapor can damage dna in a way that could cause cancer and heart disease ecigarette vapor caused dna damage the researchers came to their findings by exposing 10 male mice to ecigarette vapor containing 10 milligrams of nicotine which is comparable with what humans inhale for 3 hours per day 5 days per week for 12 weeks when compared with a control group of mice that inhaled filtered air they found that the mice exposed to ecigarette vapor showed dna damage in their heart lungs and bladder what is more the scientists found that exposure to ecigarette vapor halted dna repair processes in the lung tissue of mice they found the same outcomes when testing longterm exposure to ecigarette vapor on human lung and bladder cells in conclusion to their findings tang and colleagues write '' based on these results we propose that ecs ecigarette smoke is carcinogenic and that ecig smokers have a higher risk than nonsmokers to develop lung and bladder cancer and heart diseases '' critics of the research however claim that this study does not prove that ecigarettes are harmful to health talking to the guardian peter hajek the director of the tobacco dependence research unit at queen mary university of london in the united kingdom says that the `` study shows nothing at all about the dangers of vaping '' he continues saying `` it doesnt show that vaping causes cancer this is one in a long line of false alarms which may be putting people off the switch from smoking to vaping which would undoubtedly be of great benefit to them '' it seems that the jury is out on whether or not vaping can cause cancer and heart disease but one thing is clear more studies are needed to find outbreaking research concludes that the use of two existing drugs could successfully treat certain lung cancers the study delves deep into the molecular survival kit of lung tumors understanding how lung tumors survive and grow leads to an innovative new treatment lung cancer is now the leading cause of cancer death in the united states responsible for almost 160000 deaths each year many are driven by the kras oncogene kras is an essential gene but in its mutant form it is an important step in the generation of many types of cancer for over 30 years the kras oncogene has been a focus of research finding a way to remove its teeth would be pivotal in the treatment of a range of cancers as part of this effort rather than targeting the gene directly some scientists have focused on pathways that are related to the errant gene one pathway of interest centers on insulin and insulinlike growth factor1 igf1 this pathway helps to regulate the uptake of nutrients into the cell providing it with the energy and raw ingredients it needs to grow if the tumor cells fuel supply could be severed its onward march might be halted however it is not clear whether kras oncogenes are reliant on this particular pathway and in clinical trials results have not been encouraging in fact one study in mice found that lung tumors actually became more aggressive after the pathway was suppressed attacking krasrelated pathways undeterred a team from the boston childrens hospital in massachusetts used a fresh approach in the mouse study mentioned above the insulinigf1 signaling pathway was only partially closed off in the latest study though a genetic technique was used that shut it down entirely to do this the scientists crossed two strains of genetically modified mice the first is a wellused model for krasdriven lung cancer and the other is a mouse used to study diabetes that lacks insulinigf1 signaling in the diabetes mouse model the insulinigf1 pathway is unshackled by the deletion of two genes irs1 and irs2 these encode `` adaptor '' proteins which are essential for the smooth running of the insulinigf1 pathway '' our study uses a robust way to block insulinigf1 signaling and addresses a longstanding question in krasmutant lung cancer when you use genetics results can be more conclusive '' senior study author nada kalaany phd an assistant professor at harvard medical school boston ma using their new model the scientists demonstrated that by suppressing the two adaptor proteins insulinigf1 signaling is blocked and lung tumors are significantly suppressed '' almost all animals in this lung cancer model typically die within 15 weeks of kras activation '' says kalaany `` but the ones that lost both irs1 and irs2 were completely fine we saw almost no tumors at 10 to 15 weeks '' this finding is important because drugs that block insulinigf1 signaling are already in use and freely available the results are published this week in the proceedings of the national academy of sciences while the preliminary findings are hopeful the researchers knew that there was more work to be done cancer is a complex evermorphing disease with a terrifying knack for circumventing medical interventions outfoxing lung cancer to observe whether the cancer cells were able to navigate around this new roadblock the team let the animals live longer to see what happened next as kalaany explains `` sure enough at around 16 weeks we started seeing some tumors so then we asked how were these tumor cells able to overcome loss of irs1 and irs2 '' how lung cancer cells disguise themselves to evade chemo by adopting the traits of cells from other major organs lung cancer cells can escape chemotherapy read now the answer was found in the levels of essential cellular building blocks amino acids tumor cells lacking the adaptor proteins failed to move amino acids into their cells despite a plentiful supply outside of the cell '' growth factors like igf1 tell cells that nutrients are around '' says kalaany `` so when you suppress their signaling the tumor cells dont take up the amino acids and think they are starved '' '' but we found that the tumor cells can compensate for this and break down their own proteins to generate amino acids '' so the krasdriven tumors threw out a curve ball they had once again figured out a workaround by breaking themselves down in a process known as autophagy they can generate the raw material they need to thrive the researchers however were one step ahead heading cancer off at the pass drugs that inhibit protein breakdown are already available these include chloroquine which is currently involved in a number of cancer drug trials and bortezomib which blocks proteasomes proteindigesting structures and is already used to treat myeloma when the two prongs of the attack were combined the results were more than encouraging they found that tumor cells lacking irs1 and irs2 did not grow well and when the inhibitors were added growth stopped almost completely additional studies will now be needed to understand how these two drug types might interact in a patient however this is a considerable breakthrough and the researchers are excited to take it to the next phase '' our work tries to identify metabolic dependencies and vulnerabilities in tumors '' says kalaany `` if we identify collaborators we would love to have a clinical trial in nonsmallcell lung cancer combining igf1 inhibitors with autophagy inhibitors or proteasome inhibitors '' by testing to breaking point every part of a tumor cells survival kit researchers will one day beat cancerhigh blood pressure or hypertension is a major risk factor for heart disease the leading cause of death in the united states but a new study has found that two classes of medication that are commonly used to lower blood pressure could present a death risk all on their own researchers have identified two blood pressure drugs that could raise mortality risk scientists at the intermountain medical center heart institute in salt lake city ut found that individuals with hypertension who used alpha blockers and alpha2 agonists to control their blood pressure showed an increase in blood pressure variability which could increase mortality risk lead study author dr brian clements and team have recently presented their findings at the 2018 american college of cardiology acc scientific sessions held in orlando fl blood pressure is the force of blood that pushes against the wall of the arteries and in november last year the american heart association aha and the acc set new guidelines now a person is considered to have hypertension if their systolic blood pressure the top number is 130 millimeters of mercury mmhg or higher and their diastolic blood pressure the bottom number is 80 mmhg or higher systolic blood pressure is the force of blood against the artery walls when the heart is beating while diastolic blood pressure is the force of blood when the heart is at rest or between heartbeats the updated guidelines mean that almost half of adults in the united states have high blood pressure which puts them at greater risk of heart attack stroke and heart disease among other health problems of course when it comes to treating hypertension the goal is to lower blood pressure this may be achieved through lifestyle changes such as adopting a healthful diet and increasing physical activity medication or both previous research however has discovered that consistency is key for blood pressure levels a study published in the bmj in 2016 for example associated higher variability of systolic blood pressure with a 15 percent increase in allcause mortality according to the new study from dr clements and colleagues certain types of medication that are used to lower blood pressure may be contributing to this mortality risk two medications should be avoided for their study the researchers analyzed the data of over 10500 adults with high blood pressure the participants had their blood pressure measured at least seven times between january 2007 and december 2011 and the type of blood pressure medication they were using was monitored common blood pressure drug raises skin cancer risk researchers reveal how a blood pressure medication may increase the risk of skin cancer read now the team used these data to assess whether certain classes of blood pressure medication were associated with variability in blood pressure levels the study revealed two classes of blood pressure medication that were linked to higher blood pressure variability in subjects alpha blockers and alpha2 agonists alpha blockers which include doxazosin mesylate and prazosin hydrochloride work by dilating the blood vessels alpha2 agonists such as methyldopa work by targeting sympathetic nervous system activity thereby reducing blood vessel constriction based on the study results dr clements and colleagues say that these two medications should not be used to treat hypertension '' patients should know what their blood pressure is '' he says `` and if its up and down all the time the patient should work with their physician to explore options for the best blood pressure medications that will reduce variances '' '' where possible the two types of medications that show an increase in variances should be avoided '' dr brian clements dr clements adds that ace inhibitors angiotensin receptor blockers calcium channel blockers and thiazide diuretics may be safer treatment options for people with hypertension `` people who are on other types of blood pressure medications have an increased risk of death '' he adds however blood pressure variability is not solely down to medication dr clements notes that the way in which blood pressure is measured can have a significant effect on readings '' because of the variables that affect blood pressure measurements '' says dr clements `` finding ways to more accurately measure blood pressure can better identify effective treatments for patients who have hypertension '' for accurate blood pressure readings he recommends sitting or laying down for 15 minutes before measurements are taken avoiding stressful situations and using a wellfitting blood pressure cuff may also helpa new study reveals that individuals with higher levels of belly fat and larger waistlines are more likely to have lower vitamin d levels where fat is stored on the body may impact vitamin d levels currently in medical circles vitamin d is the talk of the town produced in our skin on contact with sunlight it plays a myriad of roles in the human body in the past few months medical news today have covered a wealth of research into the group of fatsoluble secosteroids more commonly known as vitamin d for instance recent studies have found that vitamin d might protect against heart failure diabetes and cancer and that vitamin d deficiency causes hair loss vitamin d deficiency has traditionally been linked to bone health but it may also have a role to play in respiratory tract infections and autoimmune disease among others with more than 40 percent of the population of the united states being vitamin d deficient this is a serious issue some authors have referred to it as `` an ignored epidemic '' estimating that over 1 billion people worldwide have inadequate levels vitamin d and belly fat exposed they discovered that in women both total and abdominal fat were associated with lower vitamin d levels but that abdominal fat had the greatest impact in men however lower vitamin d levels were significantly linked with fat in the liver and abdomen across both sexes more belly fat predicted lower levels of vitamin d rafiq explains `` the strong relationship between increasing amounts of abdominal fat and lower levels of vitamin d suggests that individuals with larger waistlines are at a greater risk of developing deficiency and should consider having their vitamin d levels checked '' her next step is to understand why this relationship exists does a deficiency in vitamin d cause fat to be stored in the abdominal region or does belly fat decrease levels of vitamin d it will take more work to tease apart cause and effect as rafiq explains `` due to the observational nature of this study we can not draw a conclusion on the direction or cause of the association between obesity and vitamin d levels '' '' however this strong association may point to a possible role for vitamin d in abdominal fat storage and function '' rachida rafiq the links between obesity and vitamin d deficiency are growing increasingly robust the next challenge is working out a way to effectively tackle this issuebaking soda has been used as a home remedy for generations due to its antacid properties yet its benefits run even deeper and new research may explain why it is an effective aid in the treatment of autoimmune diseases such as arthritis how can this kitchen staple change the bodys inflammatory response baking soda also called sodium bicarbonate is a kitchen staple commonly used as a raising agent for cakes that being said it has also made a name for itself as a home remedy for various conditions half a teaspoon of baking soda is often taken to ease heartburn or acid reflux for example and this substance is also used to whiten teeth in a new study whose findings are now published in the journal of immunology researchers from the medical college of georgia at augusta university reveal exactly how drinking a solution of baking soda could prime the immune system against inflammatory diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis paul oconnor a renal physiologist at augusta university and colleagues tested the effects that drinking a baking soda solution would have first on rats and then on humans their experiments tell a complex story about how this salt provides a signal to a special kind of cell called `` mesothelial cells '' telling them that the body is fine and not under attack rendering an aggressive immune system unnecessary thus harmful autoimmune responses are averted baking soda and mesothelial cells mesothelial cells line the internal organs as well as many different cavities in the body not only do they prevent organs and other internal tissue from sticking together they also serve other functions not all of which have been studied in detail in the new study oconnor and team tested the effect that a baking soda solution would have first on rats and then on healthy human participants and they noted that it influenced an intriguing mechanism can this biochemical switch off inflammation researchers may have found a way to `` switch off '' certain immune cells when necessary read now baking soda `` prompts '' the stomach to produce more gastric acid which allows it to digest food quicker and easier but in addition to this it also seems to tell the mesothelial cells that line the spleen to `` take it easy '' because there is no threat basically in oconnor words mesothelial cells learn that `` its most likely a hamburger not a bacterial infection '' so they in turn do not activate the spleens `` army '' of macrophages or white blood cells tasked with clearing up potentially harmful cellular detritus '' certainly drinking bicarbonate affects the spleen and we think its through the mesothelial cells '' oconnor explains mesothelial cells communicate with the organs they line using small projections called microvilli and the medium through which they send their message is the neurotransmitter acetylcholine from inflammatory to antiinflammatory so what actually happens the study authors note that those who drank the baking soda solution experienced a shift in the kinds of immune cells activated in the spleen in fact proinflammatory macrophages m1 dwindled in number while the levels of antiinflammatory cells m2 rose the same kinds of cells are also housed in the blood and kidneys and baking soda happens to be used in the treatment of chronic kidney disease this idea prompted the new studys authors to explore the mechanisms through which this substance might help to improve renal function '' we started thinking how does baking soda slow progression of kidney disease '' says oconnor at first the researchers analyzed the effects of the baking soda solution on a rat model of kidney disease and then again on healthy rats which acted as the control sample this is when the researchers noticed that the levels of m1 cells in the kidneys dropped while those of m2 cells increased both the rats with kidney disease and the healthy rats presented the same development and it was this shift that flagged up the notion that baking soda could influence the inflammatory response at cellular level when the researchers recruited healthy medical students and asked them to drink the baking soda solution it became apparent the antiinflammatory effect of this substance happened in the spleen as well as in the blood '' the shift from inflammatory to an antiinflammatory profile is happening everywhere we saw it in the kidneys we saw it in the spleen now we see it in the peripheral blood '' paul oconnor safe way to treat inflammatory disease one of the authors main revelations was the fact that it was the mesothelial cells that mediated the antiinflammatory signals an existing working theory had been that signals were transmitted to the relevant cells through the vagus nerve a long cranial nerve that communicates with the heart lungs and various organs in the abdomen but experiments revealed that this idea was incorrect when the scientists tried cutting off this nerve this did not affect the behavior of the mesothelial cells instead it became apparent that these cells had a more direct communication with the organs they lined than previously thought oconnor and his team became aware of this when they noted that moving the spleen affected mesothelial cells that lined it and the signals modulating the inflammatory response were lost '' we think the cholinergic acetylcholine signals that we know mediate this antiinflammatory response arent coming directly from the vagal nerve innervating the spleen but from the mesothelial cells that form these connections to the spleen '' explains oconnor the results begin to provide an answer as to why baking soda can help with autoimmune diseases including arthritis and further research into these mechanisms could help to optimize the results obtained through this common compound '' its potentially a really safe way to treat inflammatory disease '' oconnor concludesanxiety disorders are common across the united states thought to affect around 40 million adults each year however as if these feelings of worry and fear arent enough to contend with a new study suggests that older people who have worsening anxiety symptoms may be more likely to develop alzheimers disease researchers have linked increasing anxiety symptoms in older age to higher levels of a protein linked to alzheimers researchers found that increasing symptoms of anxiety were linked to higher levels of betaamyloid which is a protein associated with alzheimers disease in the brains of older people with normal cognitive functioning first study author dr nancy donovan who is a geriatric psychiatrist at brigham and womens hospital in boston ma and team say that the results suggest that a rise in the sypmtoms of anxiety could be an early sign of alzheimers the findings were recently published in the american journal of psychiatry alzheimers disease is a form of dementia characterized by problems with memory and thinking as well as changes in behavior it is estimated that around 55 million people in the us are living with alzheimers of whom around 54 million are over the age of 65 the precise causes of alzheimers disease remain unclear but scientists believe that betaamyloid plays a key role this is a protein that can form `` plaques '' which have been found to block nerve cell communication in the brains of people with alzheimers these plaques are considered to be a hallmark of the disease and research has suggested that an increase in betaamyloid levels can occur up to 10 years before the onset of alzheimers symptoms according to the new study anxiety could play a significant role in increased betaamyloid levels among older adults targeting anxiety may slow alzheimers previous studies have suggested that depression and anxiety might be indicators of alzheimers since symptoms of these mental health conditions often occur in the early stages of the disease for their study dr donovan and colleagues sought to determine whether or not betaamyloid might play a role in this association alzheimers tripleaction diabetes drug shows promise as treatment researchers reveal how a diabetes drug could help to treat alzheimers read now the research included 270 adults between age 62 and 90 with normal cognitive functioning all of whom underwent positron emission tomography at study baseline and annually during 5 years of followup in order to determine levels of betaamyloid in their brains symptoms of anxiety and depression among the adults were assessed using the 30item geriatric depression scale it was found that adults who showed an increase in anxiety symptoms over 5 years of followup also had higher levels of betaamyloid in their brains the researchers say that this indicates that worsening anxiety might be an early sign of alzheimers disease '' if further research substantiates anxiety as an early indicator it would be important for not only identifying people early on with the disease but also treating it and potentially slowing or preventing the disease process early on '' dr nancy donovan the scientists point out that followup studies are required to determine whether older adults who experience an increase in anxiety symptoms actually go on to develop alzheimersnew results could change the face of alzheimers treatment the herpes simplex virus is found to play a vital role in the condition and antiherpetic medication is shown to have a dramatic effect on dementia risk alzheimers disease may soon be treated with antiviral medication last month medical news today reported on a study that found `` strong evidence '' that viruses are involved in alzheimers disease the postmortem analyses of brain tissue found that people who lived with this dementia type also had more herpesviruses 6 and 7 than people without alzheimers now a scientific commentary suggests that the study that mnt covered is not the only one to pinpoint a link between herpes and dementia in fact three more studies have strengthened this link and the commentary recently published in the journal of alzheimers disease – takes a look at all three ruth itzhaki who is a professor of neuroscience and experimental psychology at the university of manchester in the united kingdom alongside richard lathe who is a professor in the division of infection and pathway medicine at the university of edinburgh also in the uk authored the commentary remarkable magnitude of antiviral effect the studies referenced in the commentary are two articles tsai et al 2017 and chen et al 2018 that suggest that acute herpes zoster infection puts people at a higher risk of dementia and one article that shows that aggressive treatment with antiherpetic medication drastically lowers dementia risk the latter study deemed `` most important '' by profs itzhaki and lathe examined 8362 people aged 50 and above who received a diagnosis of herpes simplex virus hsv infection as well as a control group of 25086 agematched healthy people breakthrough researchers fix alzheimers gene by correcting the faulty apoe4 gene researchers were able to erase its damaging effects on the brain read now the two groups were followed for almost a decade between 2001 and 2010 in the herpes group the risk of dementia was over 25 times higher than in the control group significantly the study also revealed that aggressive antiviral treatment reduced the relative risk of dementia by 10 times prof lathe comments on these new findings saying `` not only is the magnitude of the antiviral effect remarkable but also the fact that despite the relatively brief duration and the timing of treatment in most patients severely affected by hsv1 it appeared to prevent the longterm damage in the brain that results in alzheimers '' '' this article and two others provide the first population evidence for a causal link between herpes virus infection and alzheimers disease a hugely important finding '' prof ruth itzhaki '' i believe we are the first to realize the implications of these striking data on this devastating condition which principally affects the elderly '' prof itzhaki adds '' but '' she says `` we believe that these safe and easily available antivirals may have a strong part to play in combating the disease in these patients '' she also suggests that in the future it may be possible to prevent the disease `` by vaccination against the virus in infancy '' '' successful treatment by a specific drug or successful vaccination against the putative microbe are the only ways to prove that a microbe is the cause of a noninfectious human disease '' says prof itzhakiwith marijuana legalization on the rise an increasing number of studies are exploring the drugs potential harms and benefits however a new study suggests that when it comes to brain health alcohol is more damaging researchers say that alcohol causes more damage to the brain than marijuana does scientists at the university of colorado boulder conducted a review of existing imaging data that looked at the effects of alcohol and marijuana or cannabis on the brain their findings linked alcohol consumption with longterm changes to the structure of white matter and gray matter in the brain the use of marijuana however seemed to have no significant longterm effects on brain structure study leader rachel thayer of the department of psychology and neuroscience at the university of colorado boulder and colleagues recently reported their results in the journal addiction it is estimated that around 222 million people in the united states have used marijuana in the past month making it `` the most commonly used illicit drug '' in the country across the us however it is increasingly becoming legalized for both medicinal and recreational purposes as a result of this changing legislation researchers have been trying to find out more about how marijuana may benefit health as well as the damage that it could cause last year for example medical news today reported on a study linking marijuana use to a greater risk of psychosis in teenagers while another study claimed that the drug is `` worse than cigarettes '' for cardiovascular health on the other side of the coin researchers have found that cannabinoids which are the active compounds in marijuana could help to prevent migraine and a more recent study linked marijuana use to an increased sex drive marijuana vs alcohol which is worse for this latest study thayer and colleagues sought to learn more about how marijuana use affects the brain study coauthor kent hutchison also of the department of psychology and neuroscience notes that to date studies that have investigated this association have produced mixed results '' when you look at these studies going back years '' he explains `` you see that one study will report that marijuana use is related to a reduction in the volume of the hippocampus the next study then comes around and they say that marijuana use is related to changes in the cerebellum `` teen marijuana use may lead to bipolar symptoms later on researchers have linked marijuana use in adolescence to a greater risk of bipolar symptoms read now '' the point is that theres no consistency across all of these studies in terms of the actual brain structures '' with the aim of closing the gap on this inconsistency the researchers conducted a new analysis on existing brain imaging data they looked at how marijuana use affects white matter and gray matter in the brain and how its effects compare with another `` drug '' that we have become so accustomed to alcohol gray matter is the tissue on the brains surface that primarily consists of nerve cell bodies white matter is the deeper brain tissue that contains myelinated nerve fibers which are branches protruding from nerve cells that transmit electrical impulses to other cells and tissues the team notes that any reduction in the size of white or gray matter or a loss in their integrity can lead to impairments in brain functioning '' with alcohol weve known its bad for the brain for decades '' notes hutchison `` but for cannabis we know so little '' marijuana use had no impact the study included the brain images of 853 adults who were aged between 18 and 55 years and 439 teenagers between the ages of 14 and 18 all participants varied in their use of alcohol and marijuana the researchers found that alcohol use particularly in adults who had been drinking for many years was associated with a reduction in gray matter volume as well as a reduction in the integrity of white matter marijuana use however appeared to have no impact on the structure of gray or white matter in either teenagers or adults based on these findings the researchers believe that drinking alcohol is likely to be much more harmful to brain health than using marijuana '' while marijuana may also have some negative consequences it definitely is nowhere near the negative consequences of alcohol '' kent hutchison when it comes to the possible benefits of marijuana use however thayer and her team note that the jury is still out and further research is needed to reach some conclusionsa form of intermittent fasting known as the 168 diet helps obese individuals to lose weight and lower their blood pressure according to a new study timerestricted eating may be the key to weight loss more and more people now turn to intermittent fasting as a fast and effective way to lose weight there are different form of this diet depending on the time intervals of `` fasting '' and `` feasting '' the socalled 52 diet for instance consists of eating normally for 5 days every week and fasting for 2 days in the fasting days the dieter restricts their calorie intake to 500 or 600 per day in daily fasting or the 168 diet people eat whatever they like for 8 hours and fast for the remaining 16 a new study evaluates the benefits of this 168 pattern for obese individuals and finds that not only does the diet work but also that it helps to lower blood pressure as many as 933 million adults have obesity in the united states according to the latest data from the centers for disease control and prevention cdc thats almost 40 percent of the countrys entire population this research was led by corresponding author krista varady an associate professor of kinesiology and nutrition at the university of illinois at chicago and the findings were published in the journal nutrition and healthy aging losing weight without counting calories varady and colleagues recruited 23 obese study participants who were aged 45 years on average with an average body mass index bmi of 35 between 10 am and 6 pm the participants could eat whatever and however much they liked but they were only allowed to drink water and caloriefree drinks for the remaining 16 hours intermittent fasting may have profound health benefits some researchers say that this type of diet can also slow down aging and stave off disease read now all the study participants were followed for a period of 12 weeks and their dieting outcomes were compared with those of a previous weight loss trial of another type of intermittent fasting called `` alternate day fasting '' in alternate day fasting they can eat whatever they like for one day and fast for the following day on average when compared with the control trial those on the 168 diet consumed 350 fewer calories lost 3 percent of their weight and had lower blood pressure more specifically the systolic blood pressure of those who fasted daily dropped by an average of 7 millimeters of mercury however insulin resistance cholesterol and fat mass remained the same between the two compared groups as varady and her colleagues conclude `` these preliminary data offer promise for the use of timerestricted feeding as a weight loss technique in obese adults but longerterm largescale randomized controlled trials are required '' the studys corresponding author also comments on the significance of the findings saying `` the results we saw in this study are similar to the results weve seen in other studies on alternate day fasting '' '' but '' she adds `` one of the benefits of the 168 diet may be that it is easier for people to maintain we observed that fewer participants dropped out of this study when compared to studies on other fasting diets '' '' the takehome message from this study is that there are options for weight loss that do not include calorie counting or eliminating certain foods '' krista varady '' the 168 diet is another tool for weight loss that we now have preliminary scientific evidence to support '' varady concludes `` when it comes to weight loss people need to find what works for them because even small amounts of success can lead to improvements in metabolic health ''fish oil is hailed for its plentiful health benefits but new research suggests that the longterm consumption of fish oil or sunflower oil may increase the risk of fatty liver disease later in life researchers say that lifelong intake of fish oil or sunflower oil could raise the risk of fatty liver disease in later life by studying rats researchers found that lifelong intake of sunflower oil or fish oil led to changes in the liver that make the organ vulnerable to nonalcoholic steatohepatitis nash nash is a more serious form of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease nafld study coauthor josé luis quiles a professor of physiology working at the university of granada in spain and colleagues recently reported their findings in the journal of nutritional biochemistry it is estimated that around 20 percent of people in the united states who have nafld also have nash and the condition becomes more common with age nash is characterized by a buildup of fat in the liver which is not caused by alcohol consumption inflammation and liver cell damage the liver damage that occurs in nash can increase the risk of liver cirrhosis and liver cancer some of the key risk factors for nash include overweight and obesity high blood pressure high cholesterol and type 2 diabetes which are factors heavily influenced by diet studying how dietary fats affect the liver building on the link between diet and nash the new study from prof quiles and his colleagues suggests that the type of oils we consume could play a role in our laterlife risk of the condition the researchers came to their findings by analyzing the effects of different dietary fats including sunflower oil fish oil and virgin olive oil on rat livers in detail the team looked at how lifelong intake of each of these oils impacted the structure of the rodents livers as well as their effects on gene expression liver fibrosis or scarring oxidative stress and the length of telomeres kiwi compound may prevent nonalcoholic fatty liver disease research suggests that nafld could be prevented with a compound found in kiwi read now oxidative stress is defined as an imbalance between free radicals which are molecules that can damage cells and the bodys ability to `` deoxidize '' these molecules and prevent their harmful effects telomeres are `` caps '' at the end of each strand of dna and they protect our chromosomes the shorter our telomeres the greater the damage to our cells research has shown that a reduction in telomere length plays a key role in cellular aging and agerelated disease telomeres that are too long however can increase the risk of cancer additionally the team looked at how the liver evolves with age as a result of the different dietary fats consumed olive oil best for a healthy liver the researchers not only found that liver fat accumulates with age but they also revealed that the type of fat that builds up on the liver is influenced by the type of fats that we eat as prof quiles points out `` this means that regardless of this accumulation some livers age in a healthier way than others and with a greater or lesser predisposition to certain diseases '' the study revealed that fish oil and sunflower oil negatively impacted the liver health of the rats lifelong sunflower oil intake was found to trigger liver fibrosis and it also altered the structure of the organ led to changes in gene expression and increased oxidation in liver cells rats that had a lifelong intake of fish oil demonstrated an increase in agerelated cell oxidation in their livers the team reports and they also experienced a decrease in electron transport chain activity in the mitochondria the `` powerhouses '' of the cell which impairs cell function fish oil also led to an increase in relative telomere length in the liver the researchers report olive oil however was found to cause the least damage to the liver taken together the team says these findings indicate that virgin olive oil might be the best dietary fat for laterlife liver health '' the alterations caused by the longterm consumption of sunflower and fish oils make the liver susceptible to nonalcoholic steatohepatitis a very serious disease that may act as a catalyst for other liver diseases such as cirrhosis and liver cancer we believe that this study will be very useful in preventing and treating diverse liver diseases '' prof josé luis quiles '' virgin olive oil is the healthiest option '' he adds `` which has already been proven in relation to diverse aspects of health '' these findings may come as a surprise fish oil is the most commonly used natural product in the us due to its frequently documented health benefits still this latest study certainly provides some food for thought when it comes to choosing which fats to include in the dietpopular belief has it and even some governmental authorities on nutrition agree that we should avoid fullfat dairy products due to their high content of saturated fats but a new study boldly challenges these claims fullfat dairy products may actually be good for cardiovascular health wholefat dairy does not raise cardiovascular risk conversely some fats present in certain dairy products might even keep stroke and heart disease at bay this is the main takeaway of a recent study led by dr dariush mozaffarian from the friedman school of nutrition science and policy at tufts university in boston ma with their findings dr mozaffarian and team challenge not only popular opinions but also the stance of governmental organizations such as the united states department of agriculture usda and the us department of health human services the two bodies advise people to avoid fullfat dairy due to its impact on cholesterol levels the saturated fats found in wholefat dairy products warn the usda raise levels of lowdensity lipoprotein ldl cholesterol also known as the `` bad '' kind of cholesterol in time high ldl cholesterol may lead to cardiovascular conditions such as atherosclerosis or coronary artery disease however the new study turns the idea that fullfat dairy is bad for you on its head the surprising findings were published in the american journal of clinical nutrition marcia otto who is an assistant professor in the department of epidemiology human genetics and environmental sciences at the university of texas health science center at houston is the first and corresponding author of the paper dairy fat may prevent heart disease stroke to study the effect of dairy on mortality risk and cardiovascular health dr mozaffarian and team examined over 2900 us seniors aged 65 and above the researchers measured the participants blood plasma levels of three fatty acids contained by dairy products at the beginning of the study in 1992 6 years later and then 13 years later associations with `` total mortality causespecific mortality and cardiovascular disease cvd risk '' were examined these four foods are proven to lower your cholesterol the `` portfolio diet '' has been proved to keep the heart healthy by several studies read now during the 22year followup period 2428 of the participants died of these deaths 833 were due to heart disease however none of the three fatty acids examined correlated with the risk of total mortality in fact high circulating levels of heptadecanoic fatty acid were associated with a lower risk of death from heart disease also adults with higher levels of fatty acids overall were 42 percent less likely to die from stroke revealed the analysis dietary guidelines should be revised according to the studys corresponding author the findings suggest that current dietary guidelines need to be amended the 2015–2020 dietary guidelines for americans issued by the office of disease prevention and health promotion recommend the consumption of `` fatfree and lowfat 1 percent dairy including milk yogurt cheese or fortified soy beverages commonly known as soymilk '' however otto disagrees `` consistent with previous findings '' she says `` our results highlight the need to revisit current dietary guidance on whole fat dairy foods which are rich sources of nutrients such as calcium and potassium '' '' these are essential for health not only during childhood but throughout life particularly also in later years when undernourishment and conditions like osteoporosis are more common '' adds the researcher '' dairy fat contrary to popular belief does not increase the risk of heart disease or overall mortality in older adults in addition the results suggest that one fatty acid present in dairy may lower risk of death from cardiovascular disease particularly from stroke '' marcia otto she adds `` consumers have been exposed to so much different and conflicting information about diet particularly in relation to fats '' and she highlights the fact that `` a growing body of evidence '' suggests that dairy fat is actually good for you '' its important to have robust studies so people can make more balanced and informed choices based on scientific fact rather than hearsay '' otto concludesa new study looking at blood stem cells uncovered fresh details surrounding the mechanisms by which alcohol raises the risk of developing cancer a new study unearths the details of cancers relationship with alcohol alcohol is known to raise the risk of no fewer than seven types of cancer these are mouth upper throat pharynx voice box laryngeal esophageal breast liver and bowel cancer though the links are established exactly how alcohol works to induce malignancy is not as wellunderstood several mechanisms are thought to be at work most previous studies have only examined cells in the laboratory looking at changes in them after exposure to alcohol ethanol recently researchers from mrc laboratory of molecular biology in cambridge united kingdom set out to gain a clearer picture of the alcoholcancer relationship using whole animals their study which was funded by cancer research uk is published this week in the journal nature acetaldehyde and blood stem cells the team fed diluted ethanol to mice and then used chromosome analysis and dna sequencing to measure any damage caused by acetaldehyde a chemical produced when alcohol is processed they focused their attention on a specific cell type blood stem cells blood stem cells found in blood and bone marrow are immature blood cells that can develop into any type of blood cell including white blood cells platelets and red blood cells it is important to understand how alcohol damages these cells as faulty stem cells are known to cause cancer as alcohol is broken down in the gut bacteria convert it into large quantities of acetaldehyde a chemical that has previously been shown to cause cancer in animals even light drinkers at risk of cancer a recent statement from the american society of clinical oncology outlines the dangers of alcohol read now following the analysis the researchers found that acetaldehyde could in fact damage and break dna within blood stem cells chromosomes became rearranged and the dna sequence was permanently changed in stem cells lead study author prof ketan patel says `` some cancers develop due to dna damage in stem cells while some damage occurs by chance our findings suggest that drinking alcohol can increase the risk of this damage '' selfdefense mechanisms alongside new insights into the damage that ethanol causes to stem cells the scientists uncovered new information about the protective mechanisms employed by our bodies in response to alcohol enzymes called aldehyde dehydrogenases aldhs form the first line of defense against alcoholrelated damage aldhs break alcohol down into acetate `` which our cells can use as a source of energy '' millions of people many east asians for instance have low levels of aldh or faulty copies of the enzymes this means that toxic acetaldehyde builds up in the body these individuals will experience telltale flushed cheeks and potentially feel ill when the researchers investigated mice without aldh they found that alcohol caused four times as much damage to dna when compared with mice that could produce aldh beyond aldh the body has a range of other secondary mechanisms that can repair various types of dna damage but these mechanisms do not always work some people have mutations that render them ineffective '' our study highlights that not being able to process alcohol effectively can lead to an even higher risk of alcoholrelated dna damage and therefore certain cancers '' prof ketan patel '' but '' he continues `` its important to remember that alcohol clearance and dna repair systems are not perfect and alcohol can still cause cancer in different ways even in people whose defense mechanisms are intact '' alcohol is known to give rise to cancer and studies such as this help us to understand why and will eventually help to prevent or slow alcoholrelated cancers as prof linda bauld from cancer research uk says `` this thoughtprovoking research highlights the damage alcohol can do to our cells costing some people more than just a hangover ''it was previously believed that fructose which is the sugar found in fruit and fruit juice is processed by the liver however a new study suggests that fructose is mainly processed in the small intestine researchers reveal that fructose is primarily processed in the small intestine not the liver the study which is published in the journal cell metabolism reveals that processed highsugar food and drink only spills over into the liver for processing when the small intestine becomes overwhelmed the recent findings add to the body of scientific knowledge on the effects of too much fructose on the body we know from previous research that excessive consumption of sugar is harmful to the liver and that chronic overconsumption causes obesity increases resistance to insulin and creates conditions for the onset of diabetes last year medical news today reported on a study that found that fructosecontaining products such as sweetened drinks can increase the risk of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis a form of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease `` which can lead to cirrhosis or liver cancer '' study observed fructose digestion in mice the researchers from princeton university in new jersey used mice to study how fructose travels through the digestive system their findings suggest that there is a physiological difference in how the body processes different amounts of sugar rather than the liver processing all the sugar in the body the team observed that more than 90 percent of fructose was processed in the small intestines of the mice in the study the team found that fructose not absorbed into the small intestine is passed through to the colon where it comes into contact with the microbiome which is the microbiotic flora that inhabits the large intestine and colon fruit juices and smoothies have unacceptably high sugar content researchers reveal that a childs entire daily sugar allowance could be in one serving of fruit juice read now the researchers explain that the microbiome is not designed to process sugar so while a person could eat a large amount of carbohydrates without exposing their microbiome to any sugar this changes significantly when highsugar products such as soda and juice are consumed while the findings do not prove that fructose influences the microbiome the team believes that `` an effect is likely '' they suggest that this link should be further investigated in future studies as it may provide new insights into the adverse effects of high sugar intake eat sugar only after meals in the study the small intestine was found to clear fructose more efficiently after a meal the team theorizes that during periods of fasting such as in the morning or midafternoon individuals may be more vulnerable to fructose as the small intestine has reduced ability to process it during these times as study author joshua d rabinowitz of the lewissigler institute for integrative genomics at princeton university explains `` we can offer some reassurance at least from these animal studies that fructose from moderate amounts of fruits will not reach the liver '' '' we saw that feeding of the mice prior to the sugar exposure enhanced the small intestines ability to process fructose '' rabinowitz continues `` and that protected the liver and the microbiome from sugar exposure '' rabinowitz says that the results support `` the most oldfashioned advice in the world '' which is to `` limit sweets to moderate quantities after meals '' and avoid sugary drinks outside of meal timesit is known that being overweight or obese leads to poor health but it may be less known that abdominal fat is the most harmful type until now researchers were unsure of the mechanisms responsible for this but now they reveal how an enzyme produced by our liver raises the risk of diabetes inflammation in the fat around the belly is particularly harmful and new research reveals why when it comes to the harmful consequences of excess fat the way it is distributed across the body is key medical news today have recently reported on studies showing that abdominal fat is deeply tied to type 2 diabetes and heart disease we have also covered studies suggesting that women in particular could be at an increased cardiometabolic risk if they have a higher waisttohip ratio additional research has found that belly fat is particularly dangerous when inflamed older studies have shown that local inflammation in the adipose tissue leads to cardiometabolic abnormalities such as insulin resistance but the exact mechanism responsible for this connection between adipose tissue inflammation and cardiometabolic disorders has remained somewhat unclear for instance researchers have wondered whether the inflammation is `` a cause or a consequence of insulin resistance '' now researchers at columbia university irving medical center in new york city ny help to shed some muchneeded light on the issue they reveal that the liver contributes to this inflammation the team was led by dr ira tabas who is the richard j stock professor of medicine at columbia university vagelos college of physicians and surgeons and the findings were published in the journal nature the key role of dpp4 inhibitors in diabetes dr tabas and his colleagues used obese mice to test whether blocking an enzyme called dpp4 would lower the inflammation in their abdominal fat the researchers focused on dpp4 because humans who already have diabetes are prescribed dpp4 inhibitors to help them manage their symptoms dpp4 inhibitors work by preventing the enzyme from interacting with an insulinboosting hormone lowcalorie sweeteners may promote metabolic syndrome people with metabolic syndrome are much more likely to develop diabetes to prevent it new research suggests that these people should avoid artificial sweeteners read now in this study dpp4 did not lower abdominal inflammation in mice dr tabas explains these findings suggesting that they may be down to the difference between how dpp4 inhibitors work in the gut versus how they work in the liver '' dpp4 inhibitors lower blood sugar by inhibiting dpp4 in the gut but we have some evidence that dpp4 inhibitors in the gut also end up promoting inflammation in fat '' he states `` that cancels out the antiinflammatory effects the drugs may have when they reach inflammatory cells called macrophages in the fat '' '' from our studies '' adds dr tabas `` we know that dpp4 interacts with a molecule on these cells to increase inflammation if we could block that interaction we might be able stop the enzyme from causing inflammation and insulin resistance '' so the researchers targeted dpp4 in the liver cells instead of the gut this reduced adipose inflammation and lowered insulin resistance dpp4 inhibitors also decreased blood sugar toward human clinical trials as dr tabas reports `` inhibiting dpp4 specifically in liver cells attacks insulin resistance the core problem of type 2 diabetes at least in our preclinical models '' the researchers explain what the findings mean for future treatments of type 2 diabetes dr tabas says `` if we can develop ways to target liver dpp4 in people this may be a powerful new way to treat obesityinduced type 2 diabetes '' dr ahmed a hasan a medical officer and program director in the atherothrombosis coronary artery disease branch of the national heart lung and blood institute also comments on the findings he says `` this study reveals a potential new target for the treatment of type 2 diabetes and cardiometabolic disorders '' '' these findings may pave the way for a future clinical trial to test whether a new treatment approach based on this target could improve insulin resistance in diabetic patients more research is needed '' dr ahmed a hasanby finding a link to a condition that raises the risk of type 2 diabetes new research questions the health benefits of ketogenic diets is there a link between diabetes and the keto diet ketogenic diets are lowcarbohydrate highfat diets that have been shown to reduce weight they change metabolism so that energy comes from fat instead of sugar when researchers in switzlerland examined what happened to mice in the early stages of a ketogenic diet they found that the animals showed a poorer ability to regulate blood sugar compared with similar mice on a highfat highcarbohydrate diet in a paper on their work now published in the journal of physiology they note that `` even though keto dietfed animals appear healthy in the fasted state they exhibit decreased glucose tolerance to a greater extent than highfat dietfed animals '' the reason for this they found was that the livers of the keto dietfed mice were not responding as well to insulin this condition which is known as insulin resistance raises the risk of developing type 2 diabetes '' diabetes is one of the biggest health issues we face '' says study author christian wolfrum who is with the institute of food nutrition and health at eth zürich in switzerland insulin resistance insulin is a hormone that helps the body control levels of blood sugar or glucose if blood sugar stays above normal for long periods of time it becomes a condition called hyperglycemia that can lead to serious health problems this is the hallmark of diabetes in type 1 diabetes hyperglycemia develops because the pancreas does not make enough insulin in type 2 diabetes organs and tissues lose their ability to respond to insulin the pancreas tries to compensate by making more insulin but eventually this is not enough and leads to hyperglycemia normal blood sugar levels may not be so normal after all researchers have found that `` normal '' levels of blood glucose often mask spikes that are considerably higher than what is considered healthy read now there are a number of ways in which insulin helps control blood glucose levels one is by signaling to the liver to reduce glucose production and another is by helping muscles and tissues absorb glucose and convert it into energy insulin resistance is a `` complex metabolic disorder '' with no obvious single cause the liver becomes insulin resistant when it fails to reduce glucose production in response to insulin cells can also become insulin resistant when they need increasing amounts of the hormone to help them use glucose however the researchers found that the main reason for decreased glucose tolerance in the keto dietfed mice was due to insulin resistance in the liver `` rather than impaired glucose clearance and tissue glucose uptake '' despite extensive research into the causes of insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes they are not completely understood one thing that scientists do know is that fatlike substances called lipids are `` clearly associated with insulin resistance '' even here however many questions remain such as `` is the link due to circulating fats or to fat buildup in tissue '' ketogenic diets and ketosis by dramatically reducing intake of carbohydrates keto diets induce a metabolic state known as ketosis in this state cells that would normally get their energy from glucose switch to ketones the lack of carbohydrates makes the body break down fats into fatty acids and then into ketones keto diets are probably among the `` most studied '' approaches to weight loss of recent times a lot of research now backs the idea that keto diets have a sound `` physiological and biochemical basis '' and can significantly benefit cardiovascular health this is welcome news to many physicians for whom one of the biggest challenges that they face in their daily practices is treating obesity however while keto diets have a proven track record in tackling obesity some concerns remain many of these likely relate to a `` broad lack of knowledge about the physiological mechanisms involved '' mechanisms of insulin resistance not clear the new study helps plug some of this knowledge gap it suggests that insulin resistance in the liver can develop in the early stages of keto diets this now needs to be confirmed in humans also the underlying mechanisms that lead to insulin resistance are still unclear especially in relation to different diets this also needs to be explored further say the researchers another area that needs further research is the effect on the brain of the byproducts of fatty acid breakdown the researchers theory is that the fatty acid byproducts might have important `` signaling roles '' in the brain '' although ketogenic diets are known to be healthy our findings indicate that there may be an increased risk of insulin resistance with this type of diet that may lead to type 2 diabetes '' christian wolfrumby probing the effect that vitamin d3 has on the cells that make up the lining of blood vessels scientists at ohio university in athens oh have identified for the first time the role that the `` sunshine vitamin '' plays in preserving cardiovascular health the sunshine vitamin has been shown to preserve heart health in a paper published in the international journal of nanomedicine they describe how they used nanosensors and a cell model to identify the molecular mechanisms that vitamin d3 can trigger in the endothelium which is the thin layer of tissue that lines blood vessels it was previously believed that the endothelium served no other purpose than to act as an inert `` wrapper '' of the vascular system allowing both water and electrolytes to pass in and out of the bloodstream however advances over the past 30 years have revealed that the endothelium acts more like an organ that lines the whole of the circulatory system from the `` heart to the smallest capillaries '' and whose cells carry out many unique biological functions changes to the endothelium have been linked to several serious health problems including high blood pressure insulin resistance diabetes tumor growth virus infections and atherosclerosis which is a condition wherein fatty deposits can build up inside arteries and increase the risk of heart attack and stroke vitamin d3 has role beyond bone health the new study suggests that vitamin d3 a version of vitamin d that our bodies produce naturally when we expose our skin to the sun plays a key role in preserving and restoring the damage to the endothelium that occurs in these diseases some other natural sources of vitamin d3 include egg yolks and oily fish it is also obtainable in the form of supplements vitamin d3 is already wellknown for its role in bone health '' however '' explains senior author tadeusz malinski a professor in the department of chemistry and biochemistry `` in recent years in clinical settings people recognize that many patients who have a heart attack will have a deficiency of d3 '' '' it doesnt mean that the deficiency caused the heart attack '' he adds `` but it increased the risk of heart attack '' nanosensors probed effect of d3 on cells for their study prof malinski and colleagues developed a measuring system using nanosensors or tiny probes that are 1000 times smaller than the thickness of human hair and can operate at the level of atoms and molecules they used the nanosensors to track the impact of vitamin d3 on molecular mechanisms in human endothelial cells that had been treated to show the same type of damage that occurs from high blood pressure blood vessel discovery may prevent diabetes a new microscopy technique reveals that the transport of insulin across the endothelium differs to that suggested previously read now the findings suggest that vitamin d3 is a powerful trigger of nitric oxide which is a molecule that plays an important signaling role in the control of blood flow and the formation of blood clots in blood vessels the researchers also found that vitamin d3 significantly reduces oxidative stress in the vascular system they note that their study `` provides direct molecular insight to previously published observations that have suggested that vitamin d3 deficiencyinduced hypertension is associated with vascular oxidative stress '' the effects of vitamin d3 were similar in both caucasian and african american endothelial cells could d3 reverse cardiovascular damage the study authors note that while their findings came from tests performed on a cellular model of high blood pressure `` the implications of the influence of vitamin d3 on dysfunctional endothelium is much broader '' they suggest that vitamin d3 has the potential to significantly reverse the damage that high blood pressure diabetes atherosclerosis and other diseases inflict on the cardiovascular system '' there are not many '' prof malinski adds `` if any known systems which can be used to restore cardiovascular endothelial cells which are already damaged and vitamin d3 can do it '' '' this is a very inexpensive solution to repair the cardiovascular system we dont have to develop a new drug we already have it '' prof tadeusz malinskisome people find it harder to lose weight than others but why is this a new study has identified a molecule in fat cells that could be to blame researchers have uncovered one reason why some people may find it hard to lose weight researchers found that the fat cells of people who are obese show higher expression of a molecule called lysyl oxidase lox lox is associated with fibrosis or `` scarring '' of fat tissue which as previous research has shown can hamper weight loss efforts study coauthor dr katarina kos who works in the diabetes and obesity research group at the university of exeter medical school in the united kingdom and colleagues recently reported their findings in the journal metabolism it is thought that around 1 in 3 adults in the united states are obese which puts them at increased risk of type 2 diabetes stroke heart disease and some forms of cancer a lack of exercise and a poor diet are the primary causes of obesity so its no surprise that eating a healthful diet and increasing physical activity are the first strategies we try in an attempt to shed the pounds but these interventions can produce mixed results some individuals see the pounds fall off while others find it much more challenging the new study may have uncovered one explanation for the latter higher lox levels in people who are obese for their study dr kos and colleagues analyzed samples of abdominal fat tissue that had been taken from obese individuals before they underwent weight loss surgery compared with abdominal fat tissue samples of leaner subjects the analysis revealed that the fat tissue of obese people had greater expression of the lox molecule which is a cause of fat tissue fibrosis on further investigation the researchers found that the increase in lox expression was driven by an increase in oxygen deprivation and inflammation in fat cells which occurs when fat cells become larger weight loss breakthrough sunlight is key researchers suggest that lack of sunlight may be to blame for winter weight gain read now the scientists explain that when fat cells undergo this type of stress they lose their ability to store excess calories as a result these calories become stored as fat around important organs such as the liver and heart and this is associated with numerous health problems including heart disease and type 2 diabetes unfortunately studies have shown that fat tissue fibrosis can make it harder for individuals to lose weight `` but this does not mean that scarring makes weight loss impossible '' dr kos emphasizes '' adding some regular activity to a somewhat reduced energy intake for a longer period makes weight loss possible and helps the fat tissue not to become further overworked '' she continues `` we know that doing this improves our blood sugar and is key in the management of diabetes '' we need to look after our fat what is more the teams findings indicate that targeting the lox molecule could be one way to prevent fat cell fibrosis and possibly make weight loss easier but more studies are needed to confirm this theory dr kos notes that further research is also needed in order to identify other ways to prevent fat tissue fibrosis in the meantime she says that increasing our physical activity could help '' there is evidence that once fat tissue becomes scarred despite weight loss it may not recover fully '' she says `` we need to look after our fat tissue which can cease to cope if it is overworked when being forced to absorb more and more calories '' '' as a clinician '' dr kos concludes `` i would advise exercise or at least a walk after a meal which can make a great difference to our metabolic health ''its likely that we all enjoy a hot cup of tea or herbal infusion at least from time to time if not on a daily basis but what are the most important health benefits that some of these soothing teas can bring us read on to learn more about the top teas for our health some teas and herbal infusions have long been appreciated for their alleged health benefits but what does research have to say '' tea began as a medicine and grew into a beverage '' writes 19thcentury japanese scholar okakura kakuzo in his infamous publication the book of tea in it he speaks at length about the history of tea and the philosophy of the traditional japanese tea ceremony kakuzo was correct modern research about the history of teadrinking in the world confirms that this beverage was originally consumed less for pleasure or as a mindfulness aid calling for the drinker to take slow sips and be in the moment instead as shown by prof victor henry mair from the university of pennsylvania in philadelphia in the true history of tea early in its history the tea plant camellia sinensis became popular for its medicinal properties the tea plants main varieties camellia sinensis sinensis and camellia sinensis assamica are responsible for most of the tea brews that we are accustomed to black tea green tea white tea and oolong tea there are many other types of teas and infusions using various other plants such as aspalathus linearis which is better known as `` rooibos '' or `` redbush '' in this spotlight well give you an overview of the top five teas that can benefit your health 1 green tea a favorite with tea drinkers everywhere green tea has been praised for its medicinal properties for years some recent studies have now confirmed some of these benefits suggesting that green tea may protect various aspects of our health green tea can increase cognitive functioning to begin with this beverage has been found to enhance cognitive functioning with one study connecting it to better working memory the type of we use on a daytoday basis researchers from the university hospital of basel in switzerland found that healthy people who agreed to consume a soft drink containing 275 grams of green tea extract exhibited more intense activity in brain areas linked to working memory therefore participants who had ingested the green tea extract had better connectivity between the frontal and parietal lobes of the brain which are two regions involved in aspects of learning memory processes and decisionmaking the health benefits brought about by green tea have been linked with their content of polyphenols which are micronutrients with antioxidant properties as antioxidants these substances can protect against the action of free radicals which induce the type of cellular damage consistent with aging a 2017 study that was published in the journal of the american chemical society found that one such polyphenol found in green tea called epigallocatechin gallate may lower the risk of alzheimers disease by interacting with the `` building blocks '' that form betaamyloid plaques a buildup of these plaques in the brain is typical of this condition and impairs brain cell signaling epigallocatechin gallate this study suggests could stop betaamyloid from forming into plaques potentially helping to keep alzheimers at bay this same green tea polyphenol has also been said to slow down the growth of tumor cells of certain types of cancer such as pancreatic cancer research that was led by the los angeles biomedical research institute in california has shown that epigallocatechin gallate can disrupt the metabolism of pancreatic cancer cells thereby impairing their growth 2 jasmine tea what we refer to as `` jasmine tea '' is a type of beverage that usually has green tea at its base to which jasmine flowers are added for an enriched aroma jasmine tea is an important component of the diet of one of the longestliving populations in the world but the benefits of jasmine tea arent solely due to the antioxidant effects of the tea plant since jasmine blooms also bring their own medicinal properties to the mix in the book ikigai the japanese secret to a long and happy life authors héctor garcía and francesc miralles note that the inhabitants of a healthy longlived community in the okinawa prefecture of japan are avid drinkers of sanpincha a special blend of green tea and jasmine '' okinawans drink more sanpincha a mix of green tea and jasmine flowers than any other kind of tea '' they write suggesting that this blend may play a role in keeping the inhabitants of okinawa healthy and mentally agile well into old age this may be because like the tea plant jasmine flowers contain antioxidants which may protect cells from agerelated damage what are the best foods to fight aging read about the top five foods that will help you to stay young in body and mind read now jasmine itself has been linked with improved physical wellbeing and is said to reduce the impact of stress that is why some researchers have experimented with compounds derived from this plant in the search of better therapies for instance prof eliezer flescher from tel aviv university in israel noticed that methyl jasmonate which is a compound obtained from jasmonic acid found in the jasmine plant induces the death of cervical cancer cells and if you happen to enjoy drinking jasmine tea simply because you love the way it smells theres actually a good reason for that research that was published in the european journal of applied physiology explained that the smell of jasmine tea is soothing able to calm nerves and able to help regulate mood 3 rooibos tea another type of tea with antioxidant properties is rooibos or `` redbush tea '' which is prepared from the aspalathus linearis plant native to south africa rooibos tea may protect liver health research has suggested that the antioxidant effects of rooibos are similar to if not quite as strong as those of green tea a recent study on the rat model has suggested that the antioxidants in rooibos tea may protect the liver from oxidative stress helping to render this organ more resilient to induced damage the researchers who conducted the study noted that their findings suggest that rooibos tea or rooibosderived dietary supplements may offer a useful health boost '' results from this study suggest that the daily intake of unfermented rooibos herbal tea or a derived commercial rooibos supplement may benefit human health by providing the liver with an enhanced antioxidant capacity to reduce damage induced by toxicants '' moreover rooibos has also been cited as helpful in lowering blood pressure and relaxing tense muscles suggesting that the active ingredient in this instance might be one of the flavonoids pigments that it contains chrysoeriol unlike green or black tea rooibos does not contain any caffeine so it wont have the same stimulating effects this makes it safe to drink well into the evening 4 hibiscus tea those of you who enjoy the refreshing taste of a more sour brew may also be familiar with herbal infusions of hibiscus a plant whose flowers can be used not just to make invigorating beverages but also to give a subtle `` punch '' to salads or as an elegant garnish for sophisticated dishes hibiscus tea is an antioxidant and may bring cardiovascular benefits the most commonly used variety is hibiscus sabdariffa also known as the `` roselle '' for the tea or more correctly `` tisane '' herbal tea its calyces are typically used although other parts of the plant such as the leaves seeds and roots are safe for consumption studies have suggested that extracts from the hibiscus calyx and hibiscus leaves have antioxidant and antitumoral effects therefore they may protect against the aging action of free radicals at a cellular level as well as fight certain types of leukemia cells hibiscus tea has also been tied to cardiovascular benefits helping to regulate systolic and diastolic blood pressure that is blood pressure during and inbetween heart beats respectively though not so commonly used to brew tea hibiscus leaves have also been linked repeatedly to a wide array of health benefits thus the polyphenols in hibiscus leaves may help to induce tumor cell death in skin cancer according to a 2015 study another study from the same year also argued that hibiscus leaf extracts could inhibit the action of prostate cancer cells 5 lemon verbena tea another herbal tea whose medicinal properties are getting increasingly recognized is that made out of lemon verbena scientifically dubbed aloysia citrodora infusions with lemon verbena are said to help with weight management it is the citrusflavored cousin of a betterknown plant that has been used in herbal infusions for years verbena or vervain verbena officinalis infusions made with lemon verbena are great for those who like me prefer a subtler citrusy aroma in their hot drinks rather than the strong lemony flavor of commonly commercialized citrus tea blends the first time that i came upon this plant sold as a tisane herb was in a local organic shop that was selling it as `` weight loss tea '' in fact studies have shown that the polyphenols in this plant can decrease the formation of fatty acids marking its potential use in the treatment of obesityrelated health issues researchers have also suggested that lemon verbena extracts may help to lower inflammatory markers levels in the blood of some people with multiple sclerosis '' results demonstrate that supplementation with lemon verbena extracts may affect the cytokine inflammation markers profile depending on the clinical subtype '' the study authors conclude having a cup of your tea or tisane of choice may be a pleasant way to carve out some selfindulgence time and stimulate your bodily and mental wellbeing in a subtle way but always keep in mind that as the saying goes `` one swallow does not a summer make '' and the most potent health benefits are best reaped by leading a healthful wholesome lifestyle we picked linked items based on the quality of products and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you we partner with some of the companies that sell these products which means healthline uk and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a links aboveheart disease is still the number one killer in the united states in this spotlight we outline 16 foods that when consumed as part of a wellrounded diet might help to keep your heart healthy how can you improve your heart health with food there are many things you can do to help keep your heart healthy and diseasefree you can schedule an annual checkup exercise daily quit smoking or take steps to reduce the level of stress in your life all of these things can have a positive effect on heart health but one of the simplest lifestyle changes that will benefit your heart is watching what you eat nearly 6 million people are currently living with heart failure and around half of these will die within 5 years of being diagnosed the centers for disease control and prevention cdc warn that eating foods high in fat cholesterol or sodium can be very bad for the heart so when taking steps to minimize the risk of heart disease diet is a good place to start in this article we examine some of the best foods for ensuring that you keep a robust and healthy heart 1 asparagus asparagus is a natural source of folate which helps to prevent an amino acid called homocysteine from building up in the body high homocysteine levels have been linked with an increased risk of heartrelated conditions such as coronary artery disease and stroke 2 beans peas chickpeas and lentils beans peas chickpeas and lentils otherwise known as pulses or legumes can all significantly reduce levels of lowdensity lipoprotein ldl or `` bad cholesterol '' they are also packed with fiber protein and antioxidant polyphenols all of which have beneficial effects on the heart and general health 3 berries berries are also full of antioxidant polyphenols which help to reduce heart disease risk berries are a great source of fiber folate iron calcium vitamin a and vitamin c and they are low in fat 4 broccoli some studies suggest that regularly eating steamed broccoli can lower cholesterol levels and prevent heart disease 5 chia seeds and flaxseeds these seeds are a rich plantbased source of omega3 fatty acids such as alphalinolenic acid omega3s have many beneficial effects such as helping to lower levels of triglycerides ldl and total cholesterol they also reduce blood pressure and minimize the buildup of fatty plaques in the arteries omega3s decrease the risk of disorders that can lead to heart attack such as thrombosis and arrhythmias 6 dark chocolate dark chocolate is a rare example of a food that tastes amazing and is good for you in moderation dark chocolate delicious and hearthealthy scientists now believe that dark chocolate has protective benefits against atherosclerosis which is when plaque builds up inside the arteries increasing risk of heart attack and stroke dark chocolate seems to prevent two of the mechanisms implicated in atherosclerosis stiffness of the arteries and white blood cell adhesion which is when white blood cells stick to the walls of blood vessels what is more studies have found that increasing dark chocolates flavanol content which is the compound that makes it tasty and moreish does not diminish these protective benefits 7 coffee also in the `` almost too good to be true '' camp is coffee one recent study found that regularly drinking coffee was linked with a decreased risk of developing heart failure and stroke however it is important to bear in mind that this study which used machine learning to assess data from the framingham heart study can only observe an association between factors and can not conclusively identify cause and effect could coffee stop clogged arteries consuming more than three cups of coffee every day may lower the risk of atherosclerosis read now 8 fish high in omega3s fish is a strong source of hearthelping omega3 fatty acids and protein but it is low in saturated fat people who have heart disease or are at risk of developing it are often recommended to increase their intake of omega3s by eating fish this is because they lower the risk of abnormal heartbeats and slow the growth of plaque in the arteries according to the american heart association aha we should eat a 35ounce serving of fatty fish such as salmon mackerel herring lake trout sardines or albacore tuna at least twice per week 9 green tea a 2011 systematic review found that drinking green tea is associated with a small reduction in cholesterol which as we know is a main contributor to heart disease and stroke but the review could not pinpoint how much green tea someone would have to drink to receive any health benefits in 2014 another review studied the effects of drinking green tea on people with high blood pressure the report concluded that green tea was associated with a reduction in blood pressure but the authors were unable to determine if this modest reduction could help to prevent heart disease 10 nuts almonds hazelnuts peanuts pecans pistachios and walnuts are all hearthealthy nut options these nuts are full of protein fiber minerals vitamins and antioxidants like fish and flaxseeds walnuts are also ripe with omega3 fatty acids making them a hearthealthy snack to have on the go 11 liver of all the organ meats liver is the most nutrientdense in particular liver is bulging with folic acid iron chromium copper and zinc which increase the bloods hemoglobin level and help to keep our heart healthy 12 oatmeal because oatmeal is rich in soluble fiber it may help to reduce the risk of heart disease a 2008 review of the evidence concluded that oatbased products significantly reduce ldl and total cholesterol without any adverse effects 13 red wine sort of many studies have noted the potential health benefits of the antioxidants in red wine however it is unlikely that the benefits of the antioxidants outweigh the dangers of alcohol red wine contains beneficial antioxidants but bear in mind that it should only be consumed in moderation recently however a new study proposed that these same antioxidants could form the basis of a new stent for use during angioplasty the process where narrow or obstructed veins are widened to treat atherosclerosis the researchers behind that study are currently developing a new kind of stent that releases red winelike antioxidants into the blood to promote healing prevent blood clotting and reduce inflammation during angioplasty it is worth noting that drinking alcohol in general is not healthy for your heart in fact it is vitally important for cardiovascular health to drink alcohol in moderation if at all 14 spinach you can help to maintain a healthy heart rhythm by regularly consuming good sources of magnesium spinach is one of the best sources of dietary magnesium and consumption of popeyes favorite food is associated with a raft of health benefits 15 tomatoes tomatoes have lots of nutrients that might help keep our hearts healthy the little red fruits are chockfull of fiber potassium vitamin c folate and choline which are all good for the heart as well as helping to keep heart disease at bay potassium benefits muscles and bones and helps prevent kidney stones from forming scientists have argued that increasing potassium intake while decreasing sodium intake is the most important dietary change when attempting to reduce the risk of heart disease 16 vegetables the aha advise that we eat eight or more servings of fruit and vegetables each day vegetables are low in fat and calories but rich in fiber minerals and vitamins a healthful amount of veggies in the diet can help to moderate weight and blood pressureinsights from a new study by the university of cambridge in the united kingdom about the role of calcium in brain cells signaling mechanisms brings us closer to understanding the causes of parkinsons disease having excess calcium in the brain may be a reason for why parkinsons disease develops the presence of toxic protein deposits or lewy bodies inside brain cells is a recognized hallmark of parkinsons disease the deposits contain clusters of alphasynuclein and other proteins that have folded into the wrong shape the new study now published in the journal nature communications shows that calcium affects the way in which alphasynuclein binds to synaptic vesicles synaptic vesicles are small compartments in nerve terminals that hold the neurotransmitters or chemical messengers that carry signals between brain cells '' there is a fine balance '' notes cofirst author dr amberley stephens a postdoctoral researcher in molecular neuroscience at the university of cambridge `` of calcium and alphasynuclein in the cell and when there is too much of one or the other the balance is tipped and aggregation begins leading to parkinsons disease '' normal vs abnormal alphasynuclein worldwide there are more than 10 million people living with parkinsons disease including around 1 million in the united states in parkinsons disease there is a progressive destruction of brain cells that produce a neurotransmitter called dopamine which is important for controlling movement therefore as the disease progresses there will be a worsening of symptoms such as slowness of movement rigidity tremor and impaired coordination and balance could an existing drug halt parkinsons disease learn how a drug for a rare genetic disorder may be effective against toxic alphasynuclein clusters in brain cells read now more recent studies have revealed that parkinsons also affects brain cells that do not produce dopamine which might explain why some of the symptoms are not movementrelated although abnormal clusters of alphasynuclein a small protein comprising only 140 amino acids is a major element of the lewy bodies that are present in parkinsons disease its normal form appears to be necessary for a number of brain cell functions however apart from knowing that the protein somehow interacts with synaptic vesicles to ensure the smooth transport of molecules across the synapse or the gap between the nerve terminal and the next cell we know little about the underlying mechanism alphasynuclein acts like a calcium sensor '' alphasynuclein '' notes senior study author dr gabriele kaminski schierle of the department of chemical engineering and biotechnology at the university of cambridge `` is a very small protein with very little structure and it needs to interact with other proteins or structures in order to become functional which has made it difficult to study '' advances in microscope technology mean that researchers can now observe what happens inside cells dr kaminski schierle and colleagues used `` superresolution microscopy '' and `` isolated synaptic vesicles '' to examine the detailed behavior of alphasynuclein they found that when the level of calcium rises in the cell alphasynuclein binds to vesicles at more than one point which causes the vesicles to cluster '' we think '' explains cofirst author dr janin lautenschläger also of the department of chemical engineering and biotechnology `` that alphasynuclein is almost like a calcium sensor '' '' in the presence of calcium '' she continues `` it changes its structure and how it interacts with its environment which is likely very important for its normal function '' a delicate balance the authors propose that the abnormal clusters of alphasynuclein form when the delicate balance between the protein and calcium is upset they suggest a number of things that might cause such an imbalance such as agerelated slowing of the elimination of excess protein doubling of alphasynuclein production due to gene duplication higher calcium levels in brain cells vulnerable to parkinsons inability to buffer calcium effectively in parkinsonssensitive cells a more detailed understanding of how alphasynuclein behaves in both health and disease should lead to muchneeded new drugs for parkinsons disease the authors conclude they also note that a drug that blocks the calcium channel in heart disease might `` prove to be a valuable candidate to act against parkinsons disease via lowering intracellular calcium load '' '' this is the first time weve seen that calcium influences the way alphasynuclein interacts with synaptic vesicles '' dr janin lautenschlägertwo new studies confirm the hypothesis that the psychoactive compound found in `` magic mushrooms '' may be a useful new treatment for depression avoiding some of the side effects of conventional antidepressants magic mushrooms or shrooms may hold surprising benefits for our mental health at medical news today we have reported on a range of studies that pointed to psilocybin the psychoactive substance in `` magic mushrooms '' as a potential remedy for depression two such studies showed that the psychoactive compound can reduce feelings of anxiety and depression in people with advanced cancer while another small trial suggested that the compound could succeed where previous depression treatment has failed treating depression can be challenging not only because some depression types are treatmentresistant but also because existing therapies have a range of unwanted side effects one such adverse effect frequently reported by people living with depression is the `` emotional blunting '' indifference or apathy that comes with taking antidepressants a new study which was carried out by researchers at imperial college london icl in the united kingdom suggests that magic mushrooms could treat depression while avoiding these side effects the new research consists of two studies both of which were led by leor roseman a member of the psychedelic research group at icl participants felt emotionally reconnected in the first study published in the journal neuropharmacology 20 people diagnosed with moderate to severe depression that conventional treatment had not alleviated participated in two dosing sessions with the magic mushroom compound using functional mri fmri the team scanned the brains of the participants while they looked at pictures of emotive expressions the scans were taken before and after each drug intervention in order to assess the impact of the treatment on depression the subjects were all provided with psychological support before during and after the intervention after the treatment the participants reported feeling better `` emotionally reconnected and accepting '' the fmri scans also revealed a stronger brain response to emotive faces specifically the scientists saw more activity in the brains amygdala which is an emotionprocessing area associated with depression the study authors explain '' based on the present results we propose that psilocybin with psychological support is a treatment approach that potentially revives emotional responsiveness in depression enabling patients to reconnect with their emotions '' roseman comments on the new findings saying that they `` are important as they reveal biological changes after psilocybin therapy and more specifically they suggest that increased emotional processing is crucial for the treatment to work '' but the authors also caution that more research is needed to establish firmly whether the positive effects were due to the psychoactive compound itself the psychological counseling or the interruption of the antidepressant treatment the subjects had been on before the study '' having a healthy control group in future studies should be helpful in answering some of these questions '' roseman admits mystical experience improves efficacy the second paper published in the journal frontiers in pharmacology examined whether or not the quality of the psychedelic experience was linked with the success of the treatment roseman and colleagues gave questionnaires to another group of 20 volunteers who underwent two treatment sessions with psilocybin what to know about avoiding depression here are seven tips that may help you to avoid a depression relapse read now the researchers looked at the socalled feeling of oceanic boundlessness which is a `` mysticaltype experience '' involving feelings of unity and a lack of boundaries between the self and the universe the study revealed that the more strongly the participants felt this experience the better was their mental health in the longterm depressive symptoms subsided and the mental benefits lasted for weeks after the treatment in participants who reported a strong mystical experience '' future therapeutic work with psychedelics may consider investigating ways which enhance mysticaltype experience and reduce anxiety given the growing evidence that this serves the efficacy of the treatment model '' conclude the authors directions for future research the researchers are planning on carrying out larger trials with a healthy control group in which the effects of psilocybin could be compared with an existing antidepressant '' we also want to investigate how the amygdala responds a longer time after treatment '' roseman adds `` which will inform us about longerterm effects compared to the first study which was only looked at 1 day after the therapy '' additionally in light of the findings of their second study the group recommends that future trials with psychedelics should aim to enhance the `` mystical '' aspect of the experiencehiv therapy involves a combination of drugs that must be taken once or twice daily making treatment adherence challenging for many people but researchers may have found a solution to this problem in the form of a pill that only needs to be taken once per week researchers have developed a pill for hiv that would only need to be taken once weekly researchers from the massachusetts institute of technology mit and brigham and womens hospital both located in boston ma have developed an ingestible capsule that can slowly release 1 weeks worth of antiretroviral drugs the teams novel creation has the potential to transform hiv therapy as it means that people may only need to take a single pill once every week rather than multiple medications every day colead study author robert langer the david h koch institute professor at mit and his colleagues believe that their `` pillbox in a capsule '' could combat the current problem of adherence to antiretroviral therapy research has indicated that up to 30 percent of people with hiv fail to stick to their treatment regimen langer and his colleagues recently reported the details of their new creation in the journal nature communications hiv and antiretroviral therapy hiv is a virus that attacks and destroys immune cells that are important for staving off infection and disease if left untreated hiv can progress to aids wherein a persons immune system is so severely damaged that they become vulnerable to serious illnesses in 2016 there were around 367 million people across the globe living with hiv or aids of these individuals around 18 million were newly infected hiv could new injection work as effectively as daily drugs researchers suggest that a new antiretroviral injection may be just as effective as daily medications for hiv read now just 30 years ago hiv was considered by many as a death sentence today the virus can be successfully managed with antiretroviral drugs which work by reducing the level of hiv in the body a combination of different antiretroviral drugs must be taken every day in order for treatment to be successful but patients can find it hard to stick to such a regimen '' one of the main barriers to treating and preventing hiv is adherence '' notes the studys coauthor giovanni traverso of the mits koch institute for integrative cancer research `` the ability to make doses less frequent stands to improve adherence and make a significant impact at the patient level '' '' these slowrelease dosage systems perform equal or better than the current daily doses for hiv treatment in preclinical models '' he adds building the pillbox in a capsule with this in mind the researchers decided to build on an idea that first emerged in 2016 which was an ingestible capsule that could remain in the stomach for 2 weeks and deliver drugs in a previous study langer and his colleagues demonstrated how the capsule could help to treat malaria by slowly releasing controlled doses of the malaria drug ivermectin for their latest study the team looked at whether the capsule could be effective for the treatment of hiv but some design changes were required the original capsule consisted of six arms made of a single strong polymer each arm was loaded with drugs and folded in after ingestion the arms folded out and released the drugs for the treatment of hiv however the capsule would need to be able to release different drugs at different rates something that the original design did not allow as such the team adapted the design the main structure of the new capsule is still built from a single strong polymer but each of the six arms can hold a different medication thanks to the addition of `` release polymers '' '' in a way its like putting a pillbox in a capsule now you have chambers for every day of the week on a single capsule '' says traverso pill effective in pigs to test whether the newly designed capsule could be effective against hiv the researchers loaded it with three different antiretroviral drugs dolutegravir rilpivirine and cabotegravir that are currently used to both prevent and treat hiv on testing the drugloaded capsule on pigs the researchers found that the capsule successfully settled in the animals stomachs and they gradually released each of the three drugs over a 1week period once all of the drugs are released the capsule disintegrates allowing it to be passed through the gastrointestinal tract of course the capsule needs to be tested in humans before it can be used for the prevention and treatment of hiv but the researchers believe that their study results show promise the researchers calculated the potential impact of this onceaweek capsule at population level and they suggest that the pill could boost preventive treatment efficacy for hiv by 20 percent also approximately 200000–800000 new hiv infections could be prevented in south africa over the next 20 years commenting on the findings anthony fauci director of the national institute of allergy and infectious disease which helped to fund the study says `` a longeracting less invasive oral formulation could be one important part of our future arsenal to stop the hivaids pandemic '' '' new and improved tools for hiv treatment and prevention along with wider implementation of novel and existing approaches are needed to end the hiv pandemic as we know it studies such as this help us move closer to achieving this goal '' anthony fauciscientists experimenting with an innovative treatment for cancer have now devised a targeted injection that has already successfully eliminated tumors in mice could one shot administered directly to a solid tumor mark the end of cancer research devising more effective treatments for all types of cancer has been abundant over the past few years offering new hope all the time some of the most recent experiments include using stateoftheart nanotechnology to hunt down microtumors engineering microbes to thwart cancer cells and starving malignant tumors to death the latest study from stanford university school of medicine in california has investigated the potential of yet another approach injecting `` minute '' amounts of two agents that stimulate the bodys immune response directly into a malignant solid tumor so far their studies using mice have proven successful `` when we use these two agents together '' explains senior study author dr ronald levy `` we see the elimination of tumors all over the body '' '' this approach bypasses the need to identify tumorspecific immune targets and doesnt require wholesale activation of the immune system or customization of a patients immune cells '' dr ronald levy moreover the researchers have reason to believe in a speedier trajectory toward clinical trials for this method since one of the agents involved has already been approved for use in human therapy while the other is already under clinical trial for lymphoma treatment the studys findings were published yesterday in the journal science translational medicine onetime application of formula dr levy specializes in the use of immunotherapy which is a type of treatment wherein the bodys immune response is enhanced so that it can target cancer cells to fight lymphoma or cancer of the lymphatic system there are several types of immunotherapy including some that boost the entire immune system of the body and others that are a lot more targeted but the researchers note they all come with caveats attached crossdressing cells may improve cancer treatment what are `` crossdressing '' cells and how could they help us to fight cancer read now they may have problematic side effects be timeconsuming or be simply too costly the teams method however arguably has more benefits even beyond its potential effectiveness as a treatment '' our approach uses a onetime application of very small amounts of two agents to stimulate the immune cells only within the tumor itself '' dr levy explains this method can `` teach '' immune cells how to fight against that specific type of cancer which then allows them to migrate and destroy all other existing tumors although the immune systems role is to detect and eliminate harmful foreign bodies many types of cancer cell are able to evade detection in complex ways which enables them to grow and spread a type of white blood cell called t cells play a vital role in regulating the bodys immune response normally t cells would target and fight cancer tumors but all too often cancer cells learn to `` trick '' them and escape the immune response effective against many types of cancer in the new study dr levy and his team delivered micrograms of two specific agents into one hard tumor site in each of the affected mice the agents in question were cpg oligonucleotide a short stretch of synthetic dna that boosts the immune cells ability to express a receptor called ox40 which is found on the surface of t cells an antibody that binds to the receptor activating the t cells once the t cells are activated some of them migrate to other parts of the body `` hunting down '' and destroying other tumors importantly dr levy and his colleagues note that this method could be used to target a number of different kinds of cancer in each case the t cells will `` learn '' to deal with the specific type of cancer cell that they have been exposed to in the laboratory the scientists first applied this method to the mouse model of lymphoma and 87 out of 90 mice became cancerfree in the other three cases the tumors did recur but they disappeared when the researchers administered the treatment a second time similarly successful results were observed in the mouse model of breast colon and skin cancer also even the mice that were genetically engineered to develop breast cancer spontaneously responded well to this method of treatment a targeted approach however when scientists transplanted two different types of cancer tumor lymphoma and colon cancer in the same animal but only injected the experimental formula into a lymphoma site the results were mixed all the lymphoma tumors did recede but the same did not hold true for the colon cancer tumor confirming that the t cells only learn to deal with the cancer cells that were in their immediate vicinity before the injection as dr levy continues `` this is a very targeted approach only the tumor that shares the protein targets displayed by the treated site is affected were attacking specific targets without having to identify exactly what proteins the t cells are recognizing '' currently the team is preparing a clinical trial to test the effectiveness of this treatment in people with lowgrade lymphoma dr levy hopes that if the clinical trial is successful they will be able to extend this therapy to virtually any kind of cancer tumor in humans '' i dont think theres a limit to the type of tumor we could potentially treat as long as it has been infiltrated by the immune system '' dr levy concludesthe american college of physicians have now published their new guidelines regarding the desired blood sugar control levels for people with type 2 diabetes the recommendations aim to change current therapeutic practices and doctors should aim for a moderate level of blood sugar when treating their patients blood sugar control levels should be moderate for people living with type 2 diabetes according to new guidelines according to the most recent estimates almost 30 million people in the united states have type 2 diabetes which amounts to over 9 percent of the entire us population once diagnosed with type 2 diabetes patients are often advised to take what is known as a glycated hemoglobin hba1c test in order to keep blood sugar levels under control the test averages a persons blood sugar levels over the past 2 or 3 months with an hba1c score of 65 percent indicating diabetes patients who score over 65 percent would then be prescribed a daily insulin based treatment which they can inject themselves rapidacting injections take effect within 5 to 15 minutes but last for a shorter time of 3 to 5 hours longacting injections take effect after 1 or 2 hours and last for between 14 and 24 hours but some studies have pointed out that the hba1c test may currently be overused in the us and they have suggested that such overtesting may lead to overtreating patients with hypoglycemic drugs these drugs often have a range of side effects such as gastrointestinal problems excessively low blood sugar weight gain and even congestive heart failure additionally as some researchers have pointed out `` excessive testing contributes to the growing problem of waste in healthcare and increased patient burden in diabetes management '' in this context the american college of physicians acp set out to examine the existing guidelines from several organizations and the evidence available in an effort to help physicians make better more informed decisions about treating people with type 2 diabetes their guidelines were published in the journal annals of internal medicine an a1c of 7 to 8 percent is recommended as the acp explain the current rationale behind the existing recommendations of a score of 65 percent or below 7 percent is that keeping blood sugar this low would decrease the risk of microvascular complications over time however the acp found that the evidence for such a reduction is `` inconsistent '' as dr jack ende the president of acp puts it `` our analysis of the evidence behind existing guidelines found that treatment with drugs to targets of 7 percent or less compared to targets of about 8 percent did not reduce deaths or macrovascular complications such as heart attack or stroke but did result in substantial harms '' how can you lower your blood sugar levels here are some alternative ways to reduce your blood sugar levels read now he continues saying `` the evidence shows that for most people with type 2 diabetes achieving an a1c between 7 percent and 8 percent will best balance longterm benefits with harms such as low blood sugar medication burden and costs '' additionally the acp recommend that patients who are 80 years old and above or who live with chronic illnesses such as dementia cancer or congestive heart failure receive a treatment that focuses on reducing high blood sugarrelated symptoms instead of lowering hba1c levels the reason for this is that for patients in this category the potential side effects of hypoglycemic drugs outweigh the advantages '' results from studies included in all the guidelines demonstrate that health outcomes are not improved by treating to a1c levels below 65 percent '' dr ende explains '' however reducing drug interventions for patients with a1c levels persistently below 65 percent '' he continues `` will reduce unnecessary medication harms burdens and costs without negatively impacting the risk of death heart attacks strokes kidney failure amputations visual impairment or painful neuropathy '' '' although acps guidance statement focuses on drug therapy to control blood sugar a lower treatment target is appropriate if it can be achieved with diet and lifestyle modifications such as exercise dietary changes and weight loss '' dr jack endeas much of the world experiences a recordbreaking heat wave this spotlight turns its attention to vitamin d the socalled sunshine vitamin here we inspect the latest research the `` sunshine vitamin '' has a range of surprising benefits vitamin d is a hot topic currently with a raft of studies proclaiming its benefits for a variety of serious conditions conversely other recent studies have been more cautious questioning its perceived usefulness for treating some illnesses vitamin d is a nutrient that is synthesized in our skin when it is exposed to sunlight and it is also present in some foods sunlight is the best source of vitamin d but in the winter months the national institutes of health nih recommend topping up vitamin d levels by eating vitamin dcontaining foods each day these include oily fish fortified milk beef liver egg yolks mushrooms and fortified breakfast cereals what does vitamin d do scientists know that vitamin d is essential for many aspects of maintaining good health and that deficiency is linked with problems for both physical and mental health perhaps most notably vitamin d helps to regulate the levels of calcium in our bodies strengthening our bones and preventing boneweakening conditions such as osteoporosis increasingly though studies are also suggesting that vitamin d might have protective benefits against heart failure diabetes cancer respiratory tract infections autoimmune disease and even hair loss a surprisingly large number of people have insufficient levels of vitamin d for instance according to one study more than 40 percent of adults in the united states are deficient because of its prevalence it is important to determine what the public health implications of this epidemic might be symptoms of vitamin d deficiency can vary between individuals but they typically include pain in the joints muscles or bones fatigue breathing problems and low mood or seasonal affective disorder sad below we run through a number of intriguing recent studies that investigate associations between vitamin d and an assortment of illnesses vitamin d and heart failure several studies have suggested that vitamin d could offer protective benefits against cardiovascular illness but scientists have yet to pinpoint what mechanisms are driving this association recently though medical news today reported on a study that used a mouse model to investigate how a type of vitamin d called 125dihydroxyvitamin d3 affects heart cells in particular the researchers looked at the cells responsible for developing scar tissue following a heart attack called cardiac colonyforming unit fibroblasts ccfufs ccfufs are an important area of study because when heart tissue is scarred the heart has a harder time pumping blood which can lead to heart failure the researchers behind the study found that vitamin d inhibited the action of ccfufs which prevented scar tissue from building around the hearts of the mice in the study potentially preventing blockages in the cardiovascular system '' with further study '' wrote the authors `` vitamin d could prove to be an exciting lowcost addition to current treatments and we hope to progress these findings into clinical trials for humans '' vitamin d and cancer breast cancer and bowel cancer have both been linked with cases of vitamin d deficiency in recent studies one of these analyzed data from two randomized clinical trials and a prospective cohort study the researchers found that high levels of vitamin d were inversely associated with risk of breast cancer among women who were cancerfree at baseline studies suggest that vitamin d impacts breast cancer risk according to the study results the higher the levels of vitamin d the lower the risk of breast cancer this relationship remained significant even after the results were adjusted for confounding factors such as age body mass index bmi intake of calcium supplements and smoking habits although a link between vitamin d deficiency and colorectal cancer has previously been reported not all studies have been able to replicate these findings a new largescale study attempted to settle this by drawing on data from three continents including 5700 colorectal cancer cases and 7100 controls antifungal drug kills dormant colorectal cancer cells new research suggests that an existing antifungal drug could be effective against particularly persistent colorectal cancer cells read now the researchers calculated that people whose levels of vitamin d fall below those specified in the current guidelines have a 31 percent increased risk of developing bowel cancer by contrast those with vitamin d levels above the current recommended levels were 22 percent less likely to develop this cancer vitamin d and belly fat another recent study examined a previously observed link between obesity and lower levels of vitamin d focusing in particular on how different types of body fat might interact with vitamin d the study authors reported that having excess belly fat was linked with lower levels of vitamin d '' the strong relationship between increasing amounts of abdominal fat and lower levels of vitamin d suggests that individuals with larger waistlines are at a greater risk of developing deficiency and should consider having their vitamin d levels checked '' however the study was not able to prove whether a deficiency in vitamin d causes fat to be stored around the belly or if having belly fat somehow contributes to a deficiency in vitamin d the researchers say that future studies will attempt to determine cause and effect in this relationship vitamin d and alzheimers disease a systematic review from researchers in australia recently attempted to settle the debate surrounding vitamin ds ability to protect against alzheimers the systematic review analyzed more than 70 studies looking at the association they concluded that there was no significant association between vitamin d deficiency and risk of alzheimers intriguingly the authors did suggest that based on their systematic review there may be an association between exposure to the suns ultraviolet rays and protection against multiple sclerosis parkinsons disease and alzheimers but that this may be independent of vitamin d production the authors said that further studies would be needed to confirm these links and identify the mechanism responsible for such associations vitamin d and chronic pain over the years some scientists have theorized that low levels of vitamin d might cause or worsen chronic pain so in 2015 a group of scientists set out to collate existing evidence to examine the relationship could vitamin d ease chronic pain the resulting cochrane review updated in 2015 explains that '' observational and circumstantial evidence suggests that there may be a role for vitamin d deficiency in the etiology of chronic painful conditions '' the team scrutinized the findings from a number of studies following the analysis they concluded that the available scientific evidence is not strong enough to support a connection between vitamin d deficiency and chronic pain the authors write `` based on this evidence a large beneficial effect of vitamin d across different chronic painful conditions is unlikely whether vitamin d can have beneficial effects in specific chronic painful conditions needs further investigation '' so as ever more work will be needed to finally close the lid on this interaction we hope this article has enhanced your understanding of the latest scientific thinking around this fascinating chemical please remember however that overexposure to sunlight especially the hot midday sun can result in skin damage and increase risk of skin cancerit is still unclear what causes multiple sclerosis but new research closes in on the faulty immune system mechanisms involved in the development of this condition new research has identified another type of immune cell that may play a role in ms multiple sclerosis ms which is an autoimmune disease causes the immune system to mistakenly attack myelin myelin is the substance that coats axons which are the projections that allow neurons to connect and transmit information this process is known as demyelination and it affects the correct functioning of the central nervous system the condition is characterized by problems with balance and coordination as well as with eyesight to name but a few of its effects in the united states ms affects 250000–350000 people researchers still dont know for sure what causes ms but little by little they are uncovering the mechanisms at play and revealing more of the cellular culprits involved now neurologist roland martin and immunologist mireia sospedra at the university of zurich and university hospital zurich both in switzerland and colleagues have shown that a type of immune cell called b cells are key to the autoimmune reactions that characterize ms in a study whose results are now published in the journal cell the scientists explain that b cells influence the activity of another type of immune cell t cells which then cause inflammation '' we were able to show for the first time that certain b cells the cells of the immune system that produce antibodies activate the specific t cells that cause inflammation in the brain and nerve cell lesions '' roland martin b cells influence t cells studies into ms will tend to focus on the role played by t cells in the development of this condition since t cells are tasked with triggering an appropriate immune response once they detect the presence of pathogens when t cells malfunction and mistake healthy cells in the body for pathogens this causes harmful lesions and inflammation associated with autoimmune diseases such as ms ms new drug proven to slow brain shrinkage will this new drug vastly improve ms treatment read now martin and colleagues however found that the t cells may actually be mistakenly activated by other specialized immune cells the b cells this became apparent to the researchers after they observed the effects of certain drugs used to treat ms martin says `` a class of ms drugs called rituximab and ocrelizumab led us to believe that b cells also played an important part in the pathogenesis of the disease '' these drugs the authors note halt brain inflammation by removing b cells which suggests that these immune cells are ultimately responsible for the t cells activity a chain of reactions in order to better understand the role played by b cells in inflammation the researchers analyzed blood samples from people with ms through an experimental in vitro method they noticed that b cells were interacting with specialized t cells boosting their activity and influencing them to divide more thus feeding their attack cycle it became clear that b cells were the cause of t cell activity because when they eliminated the former the latter stopped proliferating '' this means that we can now explain the previously unclear mechanism of these ms drugs '' explains martin the investigators also note that the activated t cells they studied in the blood samples include the population of t cells that are active in brain inflammation related to ms martin and his team suggest that the t cells are able to read both the proteins released by b cells and recognize the nerve cells in the brain the scientists say that t cells are first activated in the peripheral blood only to migrate to the brain where they end up attacking myelin '' our findings not only explain how new ms drugs take effect but also pave the way for novel approaches in basic research and therapy for ms '' says martinafter tumor removal surgery treatment with erectile dysfunction drugs and a flu vaccine may help to stop the cancer returning these common medications could help to prevent cancer returning these drugs aided by the flu vaccine remove a block to the immune system that can sometimes result from cancer surgery and also give it a boost this was the conclusion that researchers at the university of ottawa in canada came to after they tested the effect of tadalafil cialis sildenafil viagra and an inactivated version of the flu vaccine agriflu in mouse models of postsurgery metastasis in a paper now published in the journal oncoimmunology they report how the unusual combination reduced cancer spread in the mice by over 90 percent a clinical trial to test the effects and safety of the treatment in humans is already under way googleadslotinfopush { '' slotname '' mnt_dlb1 '' slotcontainer '' mnt_dlb1_container } surgery can promote metastasis '' surgery '' says senior study author rebecca c auer an associate professor in the department of biochemistry microbiology and immunology `` is very effective in removing solid tumors '' but as she and her colleagues explain in their paper `` cancer surgery '' can also block the immune systems ability to eliminate any remaining cancer cells which can then spread to form new secondary tumors in a process known as metastasis viagra may cut colorectal cancer risk by half giving mice a small daily dose of viagra reduced the formation of polyps by 50 percent read now metastasis accounts for the vast majority of deaths to cancer and is the main reason that the disease is so serious the immune system has many cells that patrol the body in search of potentially harmful agents to destroy these agents are not just bacteria viruses and other pathogens but also cancer cells cancer surgery can undermine the immune system by `` altering the function of natural killer nk cells '' which are white blood cells that play a key role in clearing away metastatic cancer cells googleadslotinfopush { '' slotname '' mnt_dlb2 '' slotcontainer '' mnt_dlb2_container } surgery weakens natural killer cells tests of animals and human patients have shown that tumor surgery can weaken the ability of nk cells to attack and kill cancer cells for up to 1 month after the procedure prof auer and colleagues found that surgery does this in a roundabout way it stimulates another group of immune cells called myeloid derived suppressor cells mdscs which in turn will then inhibit the nk cells the new study shows that the erectile dysfunction drugs remove the brakes on the nk cells by targeting the `` surgeryinduced '' mdscs while the flu vaccine gives the nk cells an additional boost the researchers tested various combinations of the drugs and vaccine in mouse models of postoperative metastasis they evaluated the effectiveness of treatment by counting the number of metastases that arose in the lungs of the animals the results showed that on average without surgery the cancer spread and gave rise to 37 metastases surgery with no drugs or vaccine resulted in 129 metastases giving one erectile dysfunction drug after surgery limited the spread to 24 metastases giving one erectile dysfunction drug and the flu vaccine after surgery limited spread to just 11 metastases clinical trial the clinical trial that is already under way involves 24 patients who are having surgery to remove an abdominal tumor at the ottawa hospital the purpose of the small trial is to evaluate the safety of the treatment which is based on cialis and agriflu and observe how it affects the immune system should the trial be successful the next stage will be larger trials that assess the potential benefits prof auer says that she and her colleagues are `` really excited '' about their work because it may show that `` two safe and relatively inexpensive therapies may be able to solve a big problem in cancer '' '' if confirmed in clinical trials this could become the first therapy to address the immune problems caused by cancer surgery '' prof rebecca c auera new study conducted by researchers at stanford university in california reveals that common foods can cause blood sugar spikes in otherwise healthy people paying closer attention to these spikes could prevent diabetes and some of its complications over the course of a day blood sugar levels may spike to diabetic and prediabetic levels even in healthy individuals diabetes affects over 30 million people in the united states which is almost 10 percent of the population an additional 84 million people have prediabetes abnormal blood sugar levels are a hallmark of this metabolic disease to measure these levels physicians use two main methods they either take fasting blood sugar samples which informs them of the level of sugar in the blood at that specific point or they measure levels of glycated hemoglobin hba1c the glycated hemoglobin test is routinely used to diagnose diabetes and it relies on the average levels of blood sugar over a period of 3 months despite their widespread use neither of these methods can say anything about the fluctuations in blood sugar that happen over the course of a day so researchers led by michael snyder who is a professor of genetics at stanford set out to monitor these daily fluctuations in otherwise healthy individuals they looked at the patterns of blood sugar change after a meal and examined how these patterns vary between different people who have had the same meal prof snyder and colleagues published the results of their research in the journal plos biology three types of blood sugar variability for their study the researchers recruited 57 adults aged 51 years on average who had not been diagnosed with diabetes prof snyder and team used novel devices called continuous glucose monitors to assess the blood sugar of the participants in their normal environment also the researchers evaluated the participants wholebody insulin resistance and insulin secretion the blood sugar and metabolic measurements allowed the researchers to group the participants into three different `` glucotypes '' based on the patterns of blood sugar variability type 2 diabetes new guidelines lower blood sugar control levels the latest recommendations from the american college of physicians aim to change how physicians treat their patients read now people whose blood sugar did not vary much were grouped under `` low variability '' those whose blood sugar was found to spike quite often were grouped under `` severe variability '' and finally people who fell in between were classified as the `` moderate '' glucotype the findings revealed that `` glucose dysregulation as characterized by continuous glucose monitoring is more prevalent and heterogeneous than previously thought and can affect individuals considered normoglycemic by standard measures '' glucose often in prediabetic diabetic range next the researchers wanted to see how people of different glucotypes reacted to the same meal so they offered all the participants three types of standard breakfasts cornflakes with milk bread with peanut butter and a protein bar each participant responded uniquely to these breakfasts which suggests that different people metabolize the same food in different ways additionally the study revealed that common foods such as corn flakes caused significant blood sugar spikes in most people '' we were very surprised to see blood sugar in the prediabetic and diabetic range in these people so frequently the idea is to try to find out what makes someone a spiker and be able to give them actionable advice to shift them into the low glucotype '' prof michael snyder '' our next study will delve into the physiological causes of glucose dysregulation '' continues the senior investigator `` these include not only genetic variation but also microbiome composition and pancreas liver and digestive organ functions '' the researchers hope that their recent and future findings will help to prevent diabetes and its complicationsnumerous people in the united states and across the world are dog lovers and no wonder dogs can be loyal loving friends and a source of spontaneous joy but dogs that are stressed scared injured or ill can easily cause harm to unsuspecting humans is our behavior part of the problem a new study looks to youtube videos to understand why some dogs bite and who is more likely to get bitten dogs are for the most part our best friends many of us have given in to the temptation of petting a strangers adorable trusting dog as it passed us on our evening walk in most cases nothing other than a moment of delight with a friendly animal takes place sometimes however dogs have been known to turn from friend to foe and suddenly snap and bite at a hand outstretched to pat some studies suggest that all in all around 1000 persons end up in emergency rooms every day due to dog bites and in some cases infected wounds may place a person at risk of rabies or tetanus but the reasons behind why dogs that may otherwise seem affectionate and approachable become aggressive are not always straightforward and researchers dont have much to go on to try to understand why humans most loyal companion unexpectedly becomes aggressive at times usually data rely on information provided by individuals who have already been bitten and they may only offer an incomplete or unreliable account of the encounter but recently investigators from the university of liverpool in the united kingdom have turned to an unexpected source of information that they hope may offer a better perspective on the context in which biting takes place youtube videos '' online videos present us with an unexplored opportunity to observe dog bites firsthand something which is just not possible using other methods '' says lead study author sara owczarczakgarstecka adding '' making more use of this type of shared content for research could help us better understand how and why bites occur and contribute to the development of bite prevention strategies '' the researchers findings were published in the journal scientific reports children and infants get bitten more often the scientists methodology was fairly simple they used telling keywords including `` dog bite '' and `` dog attack '' to search youtube for videos depicting individuals getting bitten by dogs owczarczakgarstecka and team ended up analyzing 143 clips showing 362 bites uploaded to the popular website between january 2016 and march 2017 in each case the researchers assessed the context in which the dog ended up biting a person the severity of the bite who got bitten and what breed the dog pertained to in 56 of the clips the researchers were also able to ascertain what behavior both humans and dogs exhibited prior to the bite owczarczakgarstecka and team found that of the dog breeds often chosen as pets it was mostly chihuahuas german shepherds pit bulls and labrador retrievers that appeared to do the biting yet more often than not the `` offenders '' were crossbreed dogs how does rabies cause aggression dogs infected with rabies become extremely aggressive and dangerous what are the biological mechanisms behind this disease read now about 7 in 10 of the people who got bitten were male and in more than half of the situations the victims were children or infants the researchers warn that due to the relatively small number of video samples that they analyzed they were unable to establish clear relationships of causality between certain types of human behavior and instances of aggression in dogs however they did note that in many cases `` tactile contact with a dog '' became more insistent 21 seconds before the biting and that individuals getting bitten often stood or leant over the dog still owczarczakgarstecka and team admit that they struggled with some limitations especially the fact that youtube videos may be biased users the researchers surmised may be more likely to upload videos in which small dogs such as chihuahuas do the biting as these may be perceived as funnier and more likely to attract a larger number of viewers the researchers next step from here will be to study the behavior of people who interact with dogs in greater depth as well as their perception of dog bites and when they take place in order to do so they plan to interview dog owners people who work with dogs and those who have previously been bitten '' the findings '' owczarczakgarstecka explains `` could offer some valuable new insight for the development of bite prevention strategies '' '' prevention messages could emphasize the risk of leaning over a dog and simply advise avoiding contact with a dog when possible or in doubt '' she concludesdespite our best efforts to remain thin it seems that during the holiday season we put on a lot of weight why is that a new study has a surprising answer how much sunlight we get may influence how much weight we lose suggests new research plenty of us are familiar with the holiday weight phenomenon but while it is true that during the holidays were more exposed to delicious food than the rest of the year some studies have shown that in winter we continue to pack on the pounds despite conscious efforts to lose them why a new study by researchers at the university of alberta in edmonton canada reveals an unexpected culprit for winter weight gain the absence of sunlight the researchers who were led by the auspiciously named peter light from the alberta diabetes institute examined the effect of sunlight on subcutaneous fat cells or white fat cells that can be found right beneath our skin the results of their investigation make this a breakthrough study and it was recently published in the journal scientific reports how sunlight burns fat light and team examined the socalled subcutaneous white adipose tissue scwat which as the authors explain is the `` major fat depot in humans and a central player in regulating whole body metabolism '' white fat is known as the `` bad '' type of fat because it stores calories that are ideally burned for energy if dysfunctional this type of fat can lead to cardiometabolic disorders such as obesity diabetes and heart disease new drug could shrink harmful fat cells what if there was a magic pill that could help you to lose weight without any of the effort read now so in an attempt to help people with type 1 diabetes light and colleagues were working on a way to genetically engineer these white fat cells to produce insulin when exposed to light accidentally they discovered that scwat cells tend to shrink under the effect of the suns socalled blue light that is the visible type of light that boosts attention and mood during the day to further test their discovery the scientists took samples of scwat from patients undergoing weight loss surgery and examined the effect of the suns blue light on the fat cells this is what they found '' when the suns blue light wavelengths the light we can see with our eye penetrate our skin and reach the fat cells just beneath lipid droplets reduce in size and are released out of the cell in other words our cells dont store as much fat '' peter light winter weight gain explained '' if you flip our findings around '' light says `` the insufficient sunlight exposure we get 8 months of the year living in a northern climate may be promoting fat storage and contribute to the typical weight gain some of us have over winter '' '' its early days but its not a giant leap to suppose that the light that regulates our circadian rhythm received through our eyes may also have the same impact through the fat cells near our skin '' he adds the findings may pave the way for new weight loss strategies or lightbased therapies in the treatment of obesity and diabetes however light cautions against taking these findings too literally and pursuing sunlight exposure in order to lose weight as there are still many variables that remain unknown '' for example '' he explains `` we dont yet know the intensity and duration of light necessary for this pathway to be activated '' additionally he notes `` there is a lot of literature out there suggesting our current generation will be more overweight than their parents and maybe this feeds into the debate about what is healthy sunshine exposure '' either way this exciting discovery `` certainly holds many fascinating clues for our team and others around the world to explore '' light concludestoo much salt can cause cognitive deficits according to a new study published in the journal nature neuroscience luckily these negative effects may be reversed and the new study shows how too much salt in our diet can have devastating effects on our brain power and new research reveals the mechanism behind this its a wellknown fact that too much salt in our diet raises the risk of cardiovascular disease and high blood pressure but it is less known that brainrelated problems such as cerebrovascular disease stroke and cognitive impairment have all been linked to dietary salt as the authors of the new research explain it was suggested that one possible mechanism behind these negative effects involves the socalled endothelial cells inside the cerebral blood vessels endothelial cells line our blood vessels and are responsible for regulating the vascular tone but a high dietary intake of salt has been associated with dysfunction of these cells although it is known that epithelial dysfunction can bring a plethora of chronic illnesses it remains unclear exactly how saltinduced endothelial dysfunction may affect the brain in the long run this is particularly important given that the brain is heavily reliant on a steady and smooth flow of oxygen to function properly explain the study authors who were led in their research efforts by costantino iadecola from weill cornell medicine in new york city ny in their paper iadecola and colleagues show how excessive dietary salt affects our gut immune system and ultimately our brain how excessive salt affects the gutbrain axis iadecola and team fed a group of mice the equivalent of a human diet high in salt for a period of 12 weeks after the first few weeks endothelial dysfunction as well as a reduction in the blood flow to the brain could be noticed in the mice additionally behavioral tests revealed cognitive decline in the rodents their blood pressure however remained unchanged an important discovery was the increase in the guts socalled th17 white blood cells in turn the high number of th17 cells led to an increase in the levels of a proinflammatory molecule called plasma interleukin17 il17 researchers reveal how to boost brain power scientists reveal a braintraining method proven to boost your working memory read now the researchers were also able to identify the molecular pathway through which higher levels of il17 in the blood led to the negative cognitive and cerebrovascular effects the researchers wanted to see whether or not their findings would replicate in human cells so they treated human endothelial cells with il17 and obtained similar results as iadecola and his colleagues explain '' the findings unveil a gutbrain axis by which environmental factors linked to the diet lead to an adaptive immune response in the gut promoting neurovascular dysregulation and cognitive impairment '' dietary changes can reverse negative effects the good news is that the negative effects of the highsalt diet seem to be reversible the mice were returned to a normal diet after the 12 weeks and the results were encouraging '' the harmful effects of a highsalt diet were abrogated by returning the mice to a normal diet pointing to the reversibility of the vascular dysfunction and cognitive impairment '' write the authors additionally they experimented with a drug that also reversed the effects of excessive salt the amino acid larginine had the same beneficial effect on the mice as returning them to a normal diet the findings suggest that lifestyle changes or a new class of drugs may help to offset the negative effects of a highsalt dietnew research published in the journal appetite suggests that when it comes to dieting its not how much you eat but rather what you eat that influences calorie intake the most opting for more healthful foods such as salads may be more important than the amount of food that we eat faris zuraikat a graduate student in the department of nutritional sciences at pennsylvania state university led the new study which follows up from a previous 1year randomized controlled trial that investigated how different food portions influenced weight loss the former trial aimed to explore the socalled `` portion size effect '' which occurs when people are served bigger portions than what they originally wanted but end up eating more nonetheless to this end the previous trial trained the participants to gain more control over their portions presenting them with useful strategies for portion size management in this new trial study the researchers wanted to see if people who had been previously trained to manage their portions would respond differently to increasing portion sizes by comparison with untrained people as the studys first author explains the researchers `` were also interested in whether those untrained individuals with overweight and obesity or normal weight differed in their response '' calorie intake vs portion size effect to find out the researchers gathered three groups of women 34 women who were overweight and had not participated in the previous trial 29 healthy `` control '' women who had a regular weight and who had also not participated in the trial and finally 39 women with overweight and obesity who had taken part in the portioncontrolling trial during the study all women were served the same foods once a week for 4 weeks but the size of their food increased in a random order what are the best foods for weight loss in the spirit of `` its not how much you eat but what you eat '' here are some foods that promote weight loss according to available research read now additionally and significantly the calorie content of the food served also varied the foods ranged from highcalorie ones such as garlic bread to lowcalorie foods such as salads the study revealed that when given bigger portions the women across all three groups consumed more food however the participants who had been trained in portion control in the previous trial consumed fewer calories than the untrained participants '' the lower energy intake of trained participants was attributable to consuming meals with a greater proportion of lowerenergy density foods than controls '' write the authors '' all the groups were served the same meals but their food choices differed '' explains the studys lead author `` the participants who went through the training consumed more of the lower caloriedense foods and less of the higher caloriedense foods than the untrained controls '' '' consequently trained participants calorie intake was less than that of the control groups whose intake didnt differ by weight status '' why choosing lowcalorie food is important the studys lead researcher explains the significance of the findings saying `` the results show that choosing healthy lowercaloriedense foods was more effective and more sustainable than just trying to resist large portions of higher calorie options '' '' if you choose highcaloriedense foods but restrict the amount that youre eating portions will be too small and youre likely to get hungry '' zuraikat goes on barbara rolls a professor of nutritional sciences at penn state and a coauthor on the study also chimes in '' the study supports the idea that eating less of the highercaloriedense foods and more of the nutritious lowercaloriedense foods can help to manage hunger while consuming fewer calories '' barbara rolls '' you still have a full plate '' she adds `` but youre changing the proportions of the different types of foods '' the findings are particularly significant given that people who want to lose weight are often told that eating `` a bit of everything '' helps as long as the food is consumed in moderation on the contrary the new research seems to suggest that opting for more nutritious lowcalorie foods is far more important than trying to eat lessthe findings of a new study might hold promise for the future of treating chronic autoimmune conditions such as systemic lupus and autoimmune liver disease according to its authors researchers suggest that targeting a specific gut bacterium could help to prevent autoimmune disease in the study researchers from yale university in new haven ct discovered that bacteria in the small intestine can travel to other organs and induce an autoimmune response importantly the team also found that this reaction can be treated by targeting the bacteria with an antibiotic or vaccine the study results were recently published in the journal science in autoimmune diseases the immune system mistakingly attacks healthy cells and tissues some of the most common autoimmune diseases include type 1 diabetes lupus and celiac disease according to the national institutes of health nih around 235 million people in the united states are affected by autoimmune diseases a variety of autoimmune conditions have been linked to bacteria in the gut using a mouse model the yale team specifically looked at a bacterium called enterococcus gallinarum which can travel beyond the gut to the spleen lymph nodes and liver the team found that e gallinarum provoked an autoimmune response in the mice when it traveled beyond the gut the researchers were able to replicate this mechanism using cultured human liver cells and they also found e gallinarum to be present in the livers of people who have autoimmune disease how your gut bacteria may protect you from cancer not all gut bacteria are bad researchers reveal how they could help to prevent cancer read now by administering an antibiotic or vaccine to target e gallinarum the scientists then found that it was possible to suppress the autoimmune reaction in the mice and prevent the bacterium from growing '' when we blocked the pathway leading to inflammation '' says senior study author martin kriegel `` we could reverse the effect of this bug on autoimmunity '' '' the vaccine against e gallinarum was a specific approach as vaccinations against other bacteria we investigated did not prevent mortality and autoimmunity '' martin kriegel kriegel adds that the team plans to further study the biological mechanisms that are associated with e gallinarum and the implications that they might have for systemic lupus and autoimmune liver disease study adds to previous research the new study complements previous studies that have uncovered a link between gut bacteria and autoimmune diseases studies in mice for example have found that the colonization of the gut by some bacteria can lay the groundwork for the development of autoimmune disorders in the future these bacteria can cause changes in the tissue of the gut resulting in the production of antibodies that attack cells in conditions such as systemic lupus previously medical news today covered a study that suggested that altering gut bacteria might help to alleviate lupus symptoms the study published in the journal applied and environmental microbiology showed that species of lactobacillus in the gut of a lupus mouse model were linked to a reduction of lupus symptoms while the lachnospiraceae bacteria were associated with worsening symptoms of lupus '' the use of probiotics prebiotics and antibiotics '' said husen zhang first author of that study `` has the potential to alter microbiota dysbiosis which in turn could improve lupus symptoms ''new data presented at the annual meeting of the endocrine society held in chicago il suggests that consuming lowcalorie sweeteners could put people at risk of metabolic syndrome are lowcalorie sweeteners worse for health than they seem around 34 percent of adults in the united states have metabolic syndome the umbrella term for high blood pressure high blood sugar high cholesterol levels and abdominal fat we know that metabolic syndrome doubles the risk of heart disease and disease of the blood vessels putting individuals at risk of heart disease and stroke people with metabolic syndrome are also three to five times more likely to develop type 2 diabetes recently on medical news today we looked at how metabolic syndrome could be managed by yoga a study published in the scandinavian journal of medicine science in sports found that participants who took part in a yearlong yoga training course demonstrated a decrease in proinflammatory adipokines and an increase antiinflammatory adipokines adipokines are signaling proteins that instruct the immune system to either increase or decrease inflammation so it appeared that yoga benefitted the people with metabolic syndrome by reducing inflammation allowing them to better manage their symptoms another recent study even suggested that compounds found in beer could provide significant health benefits for people with metabolic syndrome by helping to improve insulin resistance in the new study researchers from george washington university in washington dc examined the effects of a lowcalorie sweetener called sucralose on human stem cells from fat tissue these were experimented on in petri dishes that simulated an obesitypromoting environment lowcalorie sweeteners increase fat formation study finds learn more about how lowcalorie sweeteners may actually increase the formation of fat read now the scientists mimicked the typical concentration of sucralose in the blood of people who consume high quantities of lowcalorie sweeteners when this was administered to the stem cells the team noticed increased expression of genes linked with fat production and inflammation the authors followed this up with a separate experiment involving biopsy samples of abdominal fat from people who were regular consumers of lowcalorie sweeteners in fat samples from people that were a healthy weight they did not find a significant increase in gene expression but in the fat samples from overweight or obese participants there was significant overexpression of fatproducing and inflammationinducing genes the study authors believe that these patterns in gene expression create conditions favorable to metabolic syndrome which in turn increases risk of prediabetes and diabetes findings should be of concern study coauthor sabyasachi sen who is an associate professor of medicine at george washington university describes the results '' our stem cellbased studies indicate that lowcalorie sweeteners promote additional fat accumulation within cells compared with cells not exposed to these substances in a dosedependent fashion meaning that as the dose of sucralose is increased more cells showed increased fat droplet accumulation '' '' this most likely occurs by increasing glucose entry into cells through increased activity of genes called glucose transporters '' prof sen explains that these findings should be of particular concern to people who are obese and have prediabetes or diabetes as these people are already at increased risk for heart attack and strokes the scientists believe that the overexpression in fatrelated genes is more pronounced in these people because they have increased amounts of glucose in their blood which creates insulin resistanceusing a new approach scientists have located a compound that stops the spread of breast pancreatic and prostate cancers in mice cancer metastasis could one day be halted by metarrestin the compound which they call metarrestin destroys a unique structure inside the nucleus of cancer cells that can spread and form new tumors a paper on the work in which researchers from the national institutes of health nih collaborated with those from northwestern university feinberg school of medicine in chicago il is published in science translational medicine in describing how metarrestin works cocorresponding study author sui huang who works as an associate professor of cell and molecular biology at northwestern university feinberg school of medicine likens it to a `` dirty bomb against cancer '' '' it could potentially result in a better outcome for patients with solid tumor cancers with high potential to spread to other organs '' she adds metastasis the final frontier cancer would not be such a potentially serious disease if it were not capable of metastasis which is a complex process wherein cancer cells escape the primary tumor and invade nearby or distant tissue to form new secondary tumors '' what kills people '' prof huang explains `` is when cancer spreads to other organs such as when breast cancer spreads to the brain liver lungs or bones '' cancer new drug may fight treatment resistance a new compound that blocks a molecule that cancer cells use to transcribe genetic information shows promise in treating drugresistant tumors read now metastasis is sometimes referred to as `` the last frontier of cancer research '' it accounts for around 90 percent of cancer deaths and this figure has not altered much in half a century once a cancer reaches the metastatic stage it becomes very difficult to treat with current methods which are much more effective at tackling the primary tumor '' many drugs '' explains cocorresponding study author dr juan jose marugan group leader of the chemical genomics center at the nihs national center for advancing translational sciences in rockville md `` are aimed at stopping cancer growth and killing cancer cells '' but so far no drug has been approved that is designed specifically against metastasis he adds metarrestin kills perinucleolar compartments metarrestin destroys a littleunderstood structure inside the nucleus of cancer cells that is known as the `` perinucleolar compartment pnc '' tests on laboratorycultured cancer cells and cells sampled from human tumors have shown that `` pncs selectively form in cells from solid tumors '' also in previous work prof huang and her team had discovered that the likelihood of cancer spread was greater when tumor cells had more pncs this led the team to wonder whether attacking pncs might reduce cancer spread and improve patients prospects in this study the scientists used `` highthroughput screening followed by chemical optimization '' to assess which compound from a list of at least 140000 might have the greatest power to destroy pncs in metastatic cancer cells they whittled down the list to 100 compounds and then they identified one that destroyed pncs in metastatic prostate cancer cells a modified version of the compound became metarrestin which `` significantly inhibited metastasis '' in mice grafted with human pancreatic breast and prostate cancer the treated mice also lived longer than untreated mice the researchers intend to apply for metarrestin to enter the food and drug administration fda new drug investigation process later this year after they have run more preclinical tests and collected the data required '' our results show metarrestin is a very promising agent that we should continue to investigate against metastasis '' dr juan jose marugannight shift work has long been linked to poor health now a new study suggests that for women such working patterns could increase the risk of cancer female night shift workers may be at greater cancer risk researchers warn researchers found that women who engaged in longterm night shifts were almost a fifth more likely to develop cancer when compared with women who did not work such shifts on looking at specific cancers the researchers found that women who worked longterm night shifts were at even greater risk of skin cancer breast cancer and lung cancer study coauthor xuelei ma phd of the west china medical center at sichuan university in china and colleagues recently reported their findings in the journal cancer epidemiology biomarkers prevention according to the centers for disease control and prevention cdc nearly 15 million people in the united states have irregular working patterns including night shifts previous research has shown that night shift work can severely disrupt our circadian rhythm this is the internal clock that regulates the bodys physiological processes over a 24hour cycle and it primarily responds to light and dark in the environment shift work has been linked to a wealth of poor health outcomes including obesity heart disease and some types of cancer in the new study ma and colleagues sought to learn more about the link between longterm night shift work and cancer risk overall cancer risk increased by 19 percent the researchers came to their findings by conducting a metaanalysis of 61 studies these included a total of 3909152 participants and more than 114000 cancer cases subjects were from asia australia europe and north america the team used these data to assess how longterm night shift work was associated with the risk of developing 11 cancer types in a separate analysis the researchers looked at whether longterm night shift work among female nurses was linked to the risk of six cancer types how does alcohol cause cancer researchers shed light on how alcohol consumption may lead to the development of cancer read now overall the new study revealed that women who worked longterm night shifts were at 19 percent greater risk of cancer compared with women who did not work longterm night shifts additionally the researchers found that women who engaged in longterm night shift work had a 41 percent greater risk of skin cancer a 32 percent greater risk of breast cancer and an 18 percent increased risk of gastrointestinal cancer in a doseresponse analysis it was also found that each additional 5 years of night shift work was associated with 33 percent increase in breast cancer risk the researchers report further investigation however revealed that the link between night shift work and greater breast cancer risk was only applicable for women who lived in north america or europe '' it is possible that women in these locations have higher sex hormone levels '' ma suggests `` which have been positively associated with hormonerelated cancers such as breast cancer '' a risk factor for common cancers from the analysis of female nurses alone the researchers found that longterm night shift work was linked to a 58 percent greater risk of breast cancer a 35 percent increased risk of gastrointestinal cancer and a 28 percent greater lung cancer risk discussing the possible reasons for the increased cancer risk among female nurses ma speculates that these women may have been more likely to undergo cancer screening due to their profession '' another possible explanation for the increased cancer risk in this population may relate to the job requirements of night shift nursing such as more intensive shifts '' adds ma overall the scientists say that their findings indicate that more needs to be done to protect the health of female shift workers particularly those who engage in such shifts for many years '' our study indicates that night shift work serves as a risk factor for common cancers in women these results might help establish and implement effective measures to protect female night shifters longterm night shift workers should have regular physical examinations and cancer screenings '' xuelei ma phd ma adds that he hopes that this research will encourage larger cohort studies in order to confirm the link between longterm night shift work and cancer among womenmultiple sclerosis can cause debilitating fatigue vision problems impaired balance and coordination and muscle stiffness it is usually disabling and its causes have not yet been clearly identified research from switzerland identifies a key factor that allows immune cells to attack neurons potentially triggering ms in multiple sclerosis ms our immune system mistakenly attacks myelin or the sheath that covers the axon the axon is the projection that allows brain cells to send electric signals carrying information as the damage occurs various functions such as motor and cognitive functions and sight are gradually impaired according to atlas an ms resource put together jointly by the world health organization who and the ms international federation in 2008 on a global level `` the median estimated prevalence of ms is 30 per 100000 '' and the united states has one of the highest prevalences of ms cases what exactly causes ms is yet unclear meaning that currently treatments focus on managing the symptoms of the condition rather than eliminating its biological triggers but emerging research from the university of geneva and the geneva university hospitals both in switzerland may have just brought us one step closer to understanding what drives the development of this disease '' we decided '' explains senior researcher doron merkler `` to analyze the infectious factors in ms by studying the autoimmune reactions provoked by different pathogens '' '' this was to try to pinpoint an element that might influence the development of ms where there has been an infection '' he adds the teams findings were published yesterday in the journal immunity viral pathogen triggers autoimmunity merkler and team decided to test out the immune systems reaction to two different pathogens or diseasecausing bacteria a viral and a bacterial one to understand what might trigger a response consistent with the development of ms to do so they worked with a mouse model injecting each type of pathogen into healthy rodents what they noticed was that a certain type of white blood cell cd8+ t lymphocytes which play a key role in the bodys immune response reacted in similar ways both to the viral and to the bacterial pathogen '' we saw a quantitatively identical immune reaction from the lymphocytes called cd8+ t '' says first author nicolas page sheep disease toxin shines a light on multiple sclerosis is there a relationship between sheep disease and ms read now '' however '' he adds `` only the mouse infected with the viral pathogen developed an inflammatory brain disease reminiscent of ms '' this observation led the scientists to examine gene expression in cd8+ t cells to see how it was affected by the viral pathogen they found that the lymphocytes that had reacted to the bacterium expressed a particular dnabinding factor or proteins that help to organize dna tox tox contributes to the development of certain lymphocytes that then mount an immune response in reaction to foreign bodies that are perceived as threatening in this case as page further explains they `` found that the inflammation environment influences the expression of tox in t lymphocytes and that it could play a role in triggering ms '' how does tox lead to ms but how could the team decide whether tox expression was in fact crucial in the development of an autoimmune disease such as ms they thought that a good way of proving its significance was by repressing the dnabinding factor in the cd8+ t cells of healthy mice what the researchers then noticed was in merklers words that `` although they received the viral pathogen the mice did not develop the disease '' normally our brains are well equipped to fend off autoimmune reactions that might damage the neurons and impact the central nervous system '' our brains have a limited regenerative capacity which is why they have to protect themselves against the bodys immune reactions which can destroy its cells by wanting to fight the virus creating irreversible damage '' merkler explains '' the brain then sets up barriers that block the passage of t lymphocytes '' he adds however when tox is activated in cd8+ t lymphocytes it renders the cells unable to receive some of the signals that the brain sends to prevent them from attacking healthy neurons so without this `` memo '' the lymphocytes then mount an autoimmune response that targets the brain cells '' this is an encouraging result for understanding the causes of the disease but there is still lots of work to be done to ascertain what really causes multiple sclerosis in humans '' says page so the next step from here for the research team will be to gain a better understanding of toxs role and to see whether it might be involved in triggering other autoimmune diseases apart from ms as well as certain types of cancerscientists have developed a new vaccine that in conjunction with existing therapies can not only treat aggressive melanoma but also prevent its recurrence have researchers finally found the best vaccine against aggressive melanoma researchers from the scripps research institute in san diego ca recently worked with experts from other institutions to develop a vaccine that would be effective against melanoma a type of skin cancer when administered in conjunction with other therapies according to prof dale boger who coled the research with nobel laureate bruce beutler `` this cotherapy produced a complete response a curative response in the treatment of melanoma '' these promising results are reported in a study paper now published in the journal pnas experimental approach fully successful the researchers tested three different therapy options in a mouse model of aggressive melanoma all of the mice received a type of cancer immunotherapy known as antipdl1 but in addition to this they also received different vaccine variants prof boger and team split the mice into three groups one group had the cancer vaccine another group had the vaccine plus a molecule called diprovocim and the third group had the cancer vaccine and another adjuvant a chemical known as alum melanoma immunotherapy for brain metastases doubles survival researchers register fresh successes for immunotherapy against metastatic melanoma read now diprovocim is an adjuvant compound that boosts therapy by reinforcing the immune response this compound is particularly attractive to researchers developing new therapies because it is easy to synthesize and modify the researchers found that the eight mice that received the vaccine plus diprovocim treatment in addition to the antipdl1 therapy had a 100 percent survival rate over 54 days in comparison the rodents that received the immunotherapy plus the vaccine only did not survive those that received antipdl1 plus the vaccine with alum saw a 25 percent survival rate over the same period '' it was exciting to see the vaccine working simultaneously with a cancer immunotherapy like antipdl1 '' prof boger says vaccine also prevents recurrence this however is not the only reason why the researchers were excited in fact the experimental vaccine has another positive effect namely protecting the body against tumor recurrence '' just as a vaccine can train the body to fight off external pathogens this vaccine trains the immune system to go after the tumor '' says prof boger the scientists found that when they tried to reintroduce melanoma tumors in the mice in the second experimental group `` it wouldnt take '' as prof boger puts it `` the animal is already vaccinated against it '' he explains when they conducted more experiments in the laboratory the researchers were able to establish that diprovocim boosts the immune response by `` prompting '' the immune system to produce tumorinfiltrating leukocytes a type of cell that attacks and eliminates cancer tumors prof boger and team also note that the vaccine plus diprovocim can be delivered quite easily since they do not have to be injected directly into a main cancer tumor in order to be effective instead the injection can be delivered intramuscularly it is given in two doses inoculated within 7 days from each other in the future the researchers want to keep experimenting with this vaccine and confirm whether it would be effective when delivered alongside other types of cancer therapy the two leading scientists involved in the recent study manage tollbridge therapeutics a medical research company that holds the patent for diprovocimyou may have taken ibuprofen today be it to ease a headache or alleviate back pain but there might be more to this common medication than pain relief a new paper suggests that a daily dose of ibuprofen could prevent alzheimers disease researchers say that ibuprofen could ward off alzheimers if taken every day led by dr patrick mcgeer who is the ceo of aurin biotech in canada the study describes how ibuprofen could reduce inflammation caused by an alzheimersrelated peptide the paper was recently published in the journal of alzheimers disease alzheimers disease is the most common form of dementia it is estimated that around 57 million adults in the united states are living with the disease this number is predicted to rise to almost 14 million by 2050 the search continues for the exact causes of alzheimers but a sticky protein called betaamyloid is believed to play a role in the disease betaamyloid can clump together and form `` plaques '' in the brain these plaques will interfere with brain cell communication which can lead to memory loss behavioral changes and many other symptoms characteristic of alzheimers disease in a study published last year dr mcgeer and colleagues revealed that a betaamyloid peptide known as amyloidbeta 42 abeta 42 is present in saliva as well as the brain and that levels of this peptide are higher in adults who are at greater risk of alzheimers based on those results the team suggests that a saliva test could be used to predict the risk of alzheimers disease years before symptoms arise '' what weve learned through our research '' reports dr mcgeer `` is that people who are at risk of developing alzheimers exhibit the same elevated abeta 42 levels as people who already have it moreover they exhibit those elevated levels throughout their lifetime so theoretically they could get tested anytime '' a true breakthrough in their paper the researchers claim that ibuprofen a widely used nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug nsaid could prevent the development of alzheimers in people with high levels of abeta 42 dr mcgeer and team point to previous research that they conducted in which they suggested that abeta 42 triggers an inflammatory response can beets tackle alzheimers at its root a new study finds that a beetderived compound could help to treat alzheimers disease read now this response could be reduced by ibuprofen and other nsaids say the researchers which could stop alzheimers in its tracks the team says that identifying the risk of alzheimers through a saliva test would offer people the opportunity to prevent alzheimers development through a daily dose of ibuprofen '' knowing that the prevalence of clinical alzheimers disease commences at age 65 '' explains dr mcgeer `` we recommend that people get tested 10 years before at age 55 when the onset of alzheimers would typically begin '' '' if they exhibit elevated abeta 42 levels then that is the time to begin taking daily ibuprofen to ward off the disease '' dr patrick mcgeer he hails the saliva test as a `` true breakthrough '' because it `` points in a direction where alzheimers disease can eventually be eliminated '' however dr mcgeers claims have been met with some criticism daily ibuprofen recommendation premature dr doug brown chief policy and research officer at the alzheimers society in the united kingdom believes that it is far too soon to be recommending daily ibuprofen for alzheimers prevention '' population studies '' he says `` which gather large amounts of information from medical records from thousands of people have thrown up an idea that taking ibuprofen and other overthecounter antiinflammatories might be linked to a lower risk of dementia '' '' but results of clinical trials with these drugs have been disappointing so far '' '' the researchers suggestion in this paper that taking a daily antiinflammatory drug as soon as a positive result for dementia risk is shown by a saliva test is premature '' adds dr brown `` based on the evidence at the moment '' he also notes the risks of longterm nsaid use including intestinal bleeding and stomach ulcers nsaids may also interact with other medications such as warfarin and produce harmful effects '' we always recommend talking to your doctor before changing your medication '' dr brown saysdogs often hailed as humans best friends have been the topic of many scientific studies looking into how they might boost our wellbeing in this spotlight well explain how your friendly pup can benefit your health across the board learn just how dogs can contribute to our physical and emotional wellbeing according to the american society for the prevention of cruelty to animals aspca an estimated 78 million dogs are owned as pets in the united states it is unclear when dogs were first domesticated but a study published last year claims that at least in europe dogs were tamed 20000–40000 years ago it is likely that humans and dogs have shared a special bond of friendship and mutual support ever since at least the neolithic period but why has this bond been so longlasting of course these cousins of the wolves have historically been great at keeping us and our dwellings safe guarding our houses our cattle and our various material goods throughout history humans have also trained dogs to assist them with hunting or they have bred numerous quirkylooking species for their cuteness or elegance however dogs are also and might have always been truly valued companions famed for their loyalty and seemingly constant willingness to put a smile on their owners faces in this spotlight we outline the research that shows how our dogs make us happier more resilient when facing stress and physically healthier to name but a few ways in which these muchloved quadrupeds support our wellbeing how dogs keep you in good health many studies have suggested that having dogs as pets is associated with better physical health as reviews of the existing literature show these findings persist dogs force their owners to take daily exercise just last year medical news today reported on a study that showed that owning a dog reduces a persons risk of premature death by up to a third also researchers at the university of harvard in cambridge ma suggest that dog owners have a lower risk of heart disease why is that it is difficult to establish a causal relationship between owning a dog and enjoying better health however the benefits may appear thanks to a series of factors related to lifestyle adjustments that people tend to make after they decide to adopt a canine friend why you should talk to your dog learn how talking to your dog helps you bond read now the most prominent such lifestyle factor is physical activity there is no way around it if you own a dog you have to commit to twice daily walks and sometimes even more according to a paper published in the journal of physical activity and health dog owners are more likely to walk for leisure purposes than both nonpet owners and people who own pet cats the results were based on studying a cohort of 41514 participants from california some of whom owned dogs some of whom owned cats and some of whom did not have any pets moreover several recent studies including one from the university of missouri in columbia and another from glasgow caledonian university in the united kingdom found that adults aged 60 and over enjoy better health thanks to the `` enforced '' exercise they get by walking their dogs '' over the course of a week this additional time spent walking may in itself be sufficient to meet world health organization recommendations of at least 150 minutes of moderate to vigorous physical activity '' philippa dall glasgow caledonian university dogs can strengthen our health not just as we grow older but also much much earlier than that before we are even born research published last year suggests that children who were exposed to dogs while still in the womb as their mothers spent time around dogs during pregnancy had a lower risk of developing eczema in early childhood also children exposed to certain bacteria carried by dogs also experienced a reduction of asthma symptoms the researchers noted dogs make people feel good perhaps the most intuitive benefit of sharing your life and home with a canine friend is that dogs give you `` feelgood vibes '' almost instantly dogs are often used as therapy animals because they have a calming effect on people it is really difficult not to cheer up even after a hard days work when you are greeted with often vocal enthusiasm by a friendly dog this researchers explain is due to the effect of the `` love hormone '' oxytocin '' during the last decades '' write the authors of a review that featured in frontiers in psychology `` animal assistance in therapy education and care has greatly increased '' when we interact with dogs our oxytocin levels shoot up since this is the hormone largely responsible for social bonding this hormonal `` love injection '' boosts our psychological wellbeing previous studies analyzed in the review have revealed that dog owners have more positive social interactions and that the presence of canine friends makes people more trustingand also more deserving of trust moreover dogs appear to reduce symptoms of depression and render people more resilient to stress that is why dogs are often used as therapy animals as researcher brian hare of duke university in durham nc noted in an interview for the washington post '' dogs make people feel good and their only job is to help people in stressful situations feel better '' researchers hypothesize that therapy dogs can improve the psychological wellbeing of children going through cancer therapy as well as help individuals diagnosed with posttraumatic stress disorder ptsd deal with disruptive symptoms or even prevent the onset of ptsd episodes what clinical research in dogs can teach us our canine companions could also give us clues and open new avenues of research when it comes to clinical research concerning our own health problems dogs share many diseases with humans by learning more about them we can also learn more about ourselves a study that mnt covered earlier this year reveals that dogs share certain metabolic conditions such as obesity with their human owners thus learning more about dogs gut microbiota and how they are affected by diet could help us understand how best to tackle our own eating habits like humans dogs can also develop some forms of cancer much like us dogs can get brain tumors to similarly destructive effect so learning which genes predispose our canine companions to gliomas may also be translated into cancer research for human patients moreover a contagious form of canine cancer could shed light into how forms of cancer found in humans have come to develop dogs can also experience certain features characteristic of dementia such as impaired problemsolving abilities researchers explain that by understanding how cognitive tasks are affected in these quadrupeds we may become better equipped to solve the riddle of dementia in the case of humans too '' dogs '' notes dr rosalind arden of the london school of economics and political science in the uk `` are one of the few animals that reproduce many of the key features of dementia '' '' so '' she goes on to add `` understanding their cognitive abilities could be valuable in helping us to understand the causes of this disorder in humans and possibly test treatments for it '' dogs are not just incredibly loveable and often very funny friends whose antics fuel the internets store of memes continuously their company also keeps us in good physical shape also their health problems sadly but endearingly often mirror our own most of all however we welcome them into our lives and have done so since time immemorial because they instantly bring us the sort of joy and calm that we would otherwise have to work hard to obtain author dean koontz summarized this perfectly in his memoir of his own muchloved dog '' one of the greatest gifts we receive from dogs is the tenderness they evoke in us by their delight in being with us the reliable sunniness of their disposition the joy they bring to playtime the curiosity with which they embrace each new experience dogs can melt cynicism and sweeten the bitter heart '' we picked linked items based on the quality of products and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you we partner with some of the companies that sell these products which means healthline uk and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a links abovenew research warns that a number of weight loss and workout supplements contain without accurately listing potentially harmful doses of a substance that has been ruled as unsafe a range of dietary supplements contain a substance that may harm you recently scientists looked into whether a range of supplements used as weight loss or workout aids may actually be harmful to those who take them the world antidoping agency wada ban all athletes from taking any drugs or supplements that include higenamine a beta2 agonist that may have toxic effects on the heart yet despite the fact that higenamine is banned by the wada and that it might be harmful to peoples cardiovascular health many dietary supplements still contain it as a substance that naturally occurs in certain plants such as aconite the researchers including john travis a senior research scientist at nsf international in ann arbor mi have revealed not only that higenamine is a widely used supplement ingredient but also that companies that produce such supplements do not properly list the dosage at which this ingredient is used '' were urging competitive and amateur athletes as well as general consumers to think twice before consuming a product that contains higenamine '' says travis '' beyond the doping risk for athletes '' he adds `` some of these products contain extremely high doses of a stimulant with unknown safety and potential cardiovascular risks when consumed '' '' what weve learned from the study is that there is often no way for a consumer to know how much higenamine is actually in the product they are taking '' john travis these findings now appear in the journal clinical toxicology concerning levels of harmful substance the researchers analyzed 24 supplements for weight loss or preworkout that listed higenamine also known as norcoclaurine and demethylcoclaurine and noticed that they featured widely varying and unreliable amounts of this substance the 24 products tested in the study were adrenal pump apidren betastim burnhc defcon1 second strike diablo dyno gnar pump higenamine high definition hypermax iburn2 liporidex max liporidex plus liporush ds2 no vate oxyshred prostunadvanced thermogenic pyroxamine razor8 ritual preworkout supplement stim shot thermovate and uplift probiotics does the evidence match the hype are probiotics really good for you read now worryingly of all the supplements that the researchers looked at only five products mentioned an exact quantity of higenamine however when the supplements were tested travis and his colleagues found that the listed quantities were incorrect actual quantities of higenamine across the range of products included anything from trace amounts to 62 milligrams per serving however based on the label instructions users may actually take up to 110 milligrams of the substance per day which may harm their health in unpredictable ways '' some plants such as ephedra contain stimulants if you take too much of the stimulants found in ephedra it can have lifethreatening consequences '' explains study coauthor dr pieter cohen '' similarly '' he adds `` higenamine is a stimulant found in plants when it comes to higenamine we dont yet know for certain what effect high dosages will have in the human body but a series of preliminary studies suggest that it might have profound effects on the heart and other organs '' according to a study published in the new england journal of medicine in 2015 about 23005 emergency department visits in the united states are related to supplement intake `` while higenamine is considered a legal dietary ingredient when present as a constituent of botanicals our research identified concerning levels of the stimulant and wildly inaccurate labeling and dosage information '' travis explains '' and as a wadaprohibited substance '' he continues `` any amount of higenamine in a dietary supplement should be of concern to the competitive athlete '' the study concludes that to better protect consumers the food and drug administration fda should now finalize their guidelines on supplement ingredients it also warns doctors that the higenamine quantities in many dietary supplements may impact cardiovascular healthblueberries are sometimes branded a `` superfood '' and for good reason they are packed full of antioxidants that offer a wealth of health benefits now a new study has uncovered another use for these little berries helping to treat cancer blueberry extract could help in the fight against cancer say researchers by studying human cervical cancer cell lines a team of researchers discovered that adding blueberry extract to radiation therapy can significantly improve treatment efficacy lead study author dr yujiang fang who works in the school of medicine at the university of missouricolumbia and colleagues recently reported their results in pathology and oncology research according to the american cancer society acs around 12820 new cases of cervical cancer will be diagnosed in the united states this year and more than 4200 women are expected to die from the disease radiation therapy remains a primary treatment for cervical cancer it involves using highenergy radiation to destroy cancer cells '' for some cancers such as late stage cervical cancer radiation is a good treatment option '' says dr fang `` however collateral damage to healthy cells always occurs '' for their study the researchers set out to determine whether or not blueberry extract could be used as a radiosensitizer which is a compound that makes cancer cells more vulnerable to radiation therapy the researchers explain that the blueberry extract does not only make cancer cells more sensitive to radiation but it also reduces the abnormal cell growth that fuels cancer development '' cancer cells avoid death by remodeling themselves '' continues dr fang `` along with reducing cell proliferation the extract also tricks cancer cells into dying so it inhibits the birth and promotes the death of cancer cells '' while further studies are needed the researchers say that their findings indicate that blueberries may be a promising treatment strategy for cervical cancer and other cancer types '' blueberries are very common and found all over the world they are readily accessible and inexpensive as a natural treatment option for boosting the effectiveness of existing therapies i feel they would be enthusiastically accepted '' dr yujiang fangdo you want to improve your mind in 2018 we have compiled the best methods to boost brain power improve memory build new neural connections ignite learning and enhance cognitive function if you would like to improve your mind in 2018 we have five tips to help you humans have brain plasticity or neuroplasticity which is the ability of the brain to change for better or worse at any age this flexibility of the brain plays a significant role in the development or decline of our brains and how our distinct personalities are shaped neural connections can be forged or severed and gray matter can thicken or shrink these changes reflect transformations in our abilities for example learning a new skill can wire new neural pathways in our brains while aging may weaken certain neural pathways that once existed and result in our memories not performing as well as they once did the american heart associationamerican stroke association have recently developed seven steps that aim to help individuals keep their brains healthy from childhood into old age they advise people to get regular exercise eat a healthful diet maintain a healthy weight control cholesterol regulate blood sugar levels manage blood pressure quit smoking in addition to following these guidelines medical news today provide five steps to reach optimal brain health and improve your mind for the year ahead 1 get physically active from childhood through adulthood and into old age physical activity has been shown time and time again to benefit brain health taking a brisk walk before an exam or test could enhance your performance physical activity affects childrens brain structure from an early age which in turn affects their academic performance researchers discovered that children who are physically fit tend to have more gray matter in the frontal subcortical and temporal brain regions as well as in the calcarine cortex these areas are all essential for executive function and motor learning and visual processes exercise has been demonstrated to improve memory and thinking ability among older adults with mild cognitive impairment aerobic exercise in particular was shown to increase brain volume in most gray matter regions including those that support shortterm memory and improve cognitive function scientists have indicated that even short bouts of physical activity may have a positive effect on the brain taking part in 20 minutes of highintensity interval training for 6 weeks has been associated with improvements in highinterference memory which allows us to differentiate between our car and one of the same make model and color for example the research also found that levels of brainderived neurotrophic factor a protein involved in the function growth and survival of brain cells was greater in individuals who experienced greater fitness gains from interval training other research revealed that a onetime 10minute burst of exercise temporarily boosts areas of the brain responsible for focus decisionmaking and problemsolving this suggests that right before a cognitively demanding task such as an exam test or interview performance may be improved by a brisk walk or cycle and if you happen to prefer a more gentle form of exercise practicing 25 minutes of hatha yoga or mindfulness meditation each day has been associated with improvements in the brains executive functions and cognitive abilities as well as the ability to regulate kneejerk emotional responses 2 eat a brainboosting mediterranean diet the mediterranean is the home to sun sea and foods known to have brainboosting properties eating pistachios could improve cognitive processing and learning the mediterranean diet is rich in vegetables fruits whole grains beans nuts seeds and olive oil it also includes moderate amounts of dairy fish and wine while red meat poultry and processed foods are limited research discovered that people who follow a mediterranean diet might have longterm brain protection study participants who consumed a mediterranean diet retained more brain volume over 3 years than those not following the diet eating a mediterranean diet has also been shown to slow down the rate of cognitive decline and is linked with improved brain function in older adults a study that focused on the impact of eating nuts on the brain found that regular nut consumption strengthens brainwave frequencies that are related to cognition learning memory healing and other vital brain functions cognitive ability genes identified this study uncovered 70 new genes related to cognitive ability read now the research team tested almonds cashews pecans pistachios and walnuts although peanuts are actually legumes they were still included in the study some types of nut were found to stimulate specific brain frequencies more than others pistachios seemed to generate the highest gamma wave response while peanuts produced the most significant delta response gamma wave response is tied to information retention learning cognitive processing and perception and delta wave response is linked to natural healing and healthy immunity 3 expand cognitive abilities with training brain training has had mixed results in studies while some research has shown that brain training improves memory and cognitive ability other studies report that there is little evidence to support claims that braintraining programs improve everyday cognitive performance mastering the memory of loci training method could expand your memory capacity recent papers have determined that the type of brain exercise is an important factor in the outcome of braintraining sessions research that was led by radboud university medical center in nijmegen the netherlands found that not only is supersized memory ability trainable but it is also longlasting individuals with typical memory skills used a strategic memory improvement technique known as memory of loci training for 30 minutes each day for 40 days the participants went from recalling around 26 words from a list of 72 to remembering 62 words so the training more than doubled their memory capacity improvements in recall were observed for at least 4 months after training the memory of loci is a mnemonic device that uses familiar objects in a room or landmarks on a journey to visualize memorize and recall an unlimited amount of information in a fixed order 4 learn a new language in addition to brain training another method you can use to give your brain a workout is to learn a new language or several foreign languages learning foreign languages ignites cognitive abilities in infants benefits the aging brain and sharpens the mind learn one or many foreign languages to slow down cognitive decline researchers at the higher school of economics in moscow russia as well as the university of helsinki in finland report that learning foreign languages enhances the elasticity of the brain and its capacity to code information they explain that the more languages a person learns the faster their neural network reacts to process the accumulated data other research which was led by the university of edinburgh in the united kingdom revealed that speaking two or more languages might slow down the cognitive decline associated with aging even if the other languages are learned during adulthood 5 study a musical instrument regardless of whether you study a musical instrument during childhood or adulthood unleashing your inner mozart will have a beneficial effect on your brain studying a musical instrument helps to protect the brain exposure to music at a young age contributes to improved brain development establishes neural networks and stimulates existing tracts in the brain receiving musical training as a child has been demonstrated to prevent the deterioration of speech listening skills in later years and may ward off agerelated cognitive decline a study that was published in the journal of neuroscience uncovered the reason why playing a musical instrument might have a protective effect on the brain the scientists found that playing sounds on an instrument changes brain waves in such a way that rapidly improves listening and hearing skills the altered brain activity illustrates that the brain can rewire itself and compensate for disease or injuries that may get in the way of a persons ability to perform tasks learning a physical task with music has also been shown to increase structural connectivity between the areas of the brain that are responsible for processing sounds and controlling movement adding just a few of these activities to your weekly schedule will enhance your mind and give your brain a boost if you only have time to fit one brainenriching task into your week we recommend getting out for a brisk walk physical activity has no end of benefits for your body and mindcoconut oil has been all the rage for some time endorsed by a number of celebrities as a superfood this tropicalsmelling fat often liberally applied to our skin and scalps is a favorite of many but the question remains is it healthful or not are the health claims that adorn coconut oil based on fact or fiction fat suffered a bad reputation for a long time and we were told to opt for lowfat options instead but the tides turned eventually prompting us to see fats in a new light our lives became simpler we learned how to avoid bad saturated and hydrogenated fats and eat good unsaturated ones to keep our tickers and arteries healthy then the humble coconut came along in 2003 and the waters were once again muddied seen by some as a superfood but recently labeled by the american heart association aha as part of the pool of unhealthful fats the controversy goes on so what are the scientific facts behind the coconut oil hype and what are the latest developments secret ingredient mediumchain fatty acids many of the purported health claims surrounding coconut oil stem from research published in 2003 by mariepierre stonge phd a professor of nutritional medicine at columbia university in new york city ny prof stonge found that in overweight women consumption of mediumchain fatty acids such as those found in coconut oil led to an increase in energy expenditure and fat oxidation compared with women who ate longchain or saturated fatty acids but prof stonge used a specially formulated fat diet in her study not coconut oil and she never claimed that coconut oil was the secret to the results seen in her research the rumor mill had begun to spin and coconut oil became widely hailed as a superfood in fact a 2009 study involving 40 women showed that 30 milliliters of coconut oil consumed daily for a 12week period increased good highdensity lipoprotein hdl levels accompanied by a reduction in waist circumference as more studies have followed the picture became less clearcut aha and who advise to limit consumption despite the number of studies casting coconut oil in a favorable light the aha issued an advisory note on dietary fats and cardiovascular disease in june 2017 recommending that we replace saturated fats with more healthful unsaturated fats this includes coconut oil as the world health organization who state `` unsaturated fats eg found in fish avocado nuts sunflower canola and olive oils are preferable to saturated fats eg found in fatty meat butter palm and coconut oil cream cheese ghee and lard '' the reason saturated fat is bad for our cardiovascular health however there is another twist to this fascinating tale coconut oil for sunburn does it work could sunburn be relieved using coconut oil read now while lowdensity lipoprotein ldl is generally thought of as `` bad '' cholesterol the hdl type is widely accepted as being its `` healthful '' counterpart yet in 2017 we covered three studies that potentially turn what we know about fats and cholesterol on its head the first strudy found that saturated fats may not `` clog '' our arteries after all while the second one uncovered a link between `` good '' hdl and mortality the third study published in november 2017 showed that high levels of hdl may not protect us from heart disease as previously thought what is the latest one of the problems with the controversy surrounding coconut oil is the lack of goodquality largescale human studies but adding to the body of evidence is a new study by the bbcs `` trust me im a doctor '' team together with dr kaytee khaw a professor of clinical gerontology and dr nita gandhi forouhi a professor of population health and nutrition both at the university of cambridge in the united kingdom the team compared the effects of coconut oil olive oil and butter in 94 human volunteers each study participant was asked to consume 50 grams of one of these fats daily for 4 weeks the results came as a surprise those who consumed coconut oil saw a 15 percent increase in hdl levels while this number only stood at 5 percent for olive oil which is accepted as being good for our cardiovascular system if we are working on the premise that hdl is good then these results speak in favor of coconut oil it is important to note however that the results of this study have not been peerreviewed and must be treated as preliminary coconut oil the verdict so is coconut oil healthful or not as with many research areas there is no straightforward answer if you are looking to lose weight its worth bearing in mind that coconut oil is very high in saturated fat and one tablespoon contains 120 calories if its cardiovascular health that you are after the official party line drawn by the aha and who still puts coconut oil on the list of fats to limit but who knows maybe the tables will turn and new guidelines will emerge in the meantime coconut oil can be part of a healthful balanced diet if consumed in moderation however its worth looking out for coconut oil in packaged foods especially partially hydrogenated coconut oil this is a source of trans fats which the food and drug administration fda say increase the risk of heart diseasegroundbreaking research shows for the first time how the most wellknown genetic risk factor for alzheimers disease causes signs in human brain cells also the scientists managed to correct the gene and erase its harmful effects scientists fix the faulty gene that most likely causes alzheimers the complex role of the apolipoprotein apoe gene in the development of alzheimers has been studied extensively for instance researchers know that having one copy of the apoe4 gene variant raises the risk of alzheimers by two to three times and having two copies of this genetic variant puts people at a 12fold higher risk normally apoes role is to provide instructions for creating the protein of the same name in combination with fats apoe creates lipoproteins which help to transport and regulate levels of cholesterol throughout our bloodstream however the e4 version of the gene seems to be particularly damaging to the brain with several studies showing that this genetic variant increases the risk of toxic amyloid beta and tau buildup but why is that what makes the e4 variant of this gene so much more harmful than other variants researchers at the gladstone institutes in san francisco ca wanted to find out their findings have just been published in the journal nature medicine apoe4 studied in human cells for first time more specifically the researchers wanted to locate and understand the fine yet crucial difference between the e3 and e4 variants that makes the apoe4 gene so devastating is it a case the researchers wondered of the e4 variant making apoe3 lose some of its functions or is it the case that more apoe4 has toxic effects alzheimers this antibody may halt brain injury apoetargeting antibodies halved the amount of toxic plaques in mices brains read now lead investigator dr yadong huang a professor of neurology and pathology at the university of california san francisco explains the importance of this question '' its fundamentally important '' he says `` to address this question because it changes how you treat the problem if the damage is caused due to the loss of a proteins function you would want to increase protein levels to supplement those functions '' '' but if the accumulation of a protein leads to a toxic function you want to lower production of the protein to block its detrimental effect '' to find out the researchers modeled the disease in human cells examining the effect of apoe4 on human brain cells for the first time dr huang explains why changing the disease model was in itself a huge step for alzheimers research '' many drugs '' he explains `` work beautifully in a mouse model but so far theyve all failed in clinical trials one concern within the field has been how poorly these mouse models really mimic human disease '' of mice and humans study finds differences applying stem cell technology to skin cells from people with alzheimers who had two copies of the apoe4 gene dr huang and his team created neurons the researchers also created brain cells using skin cells from people who didnt have alzheimers and had two copies of the apoe3 gene the scientists found that in human brain cells the apoe4 protein has a `` pathogenic conformation '' meaning that it has an abnormal form that prevents it from functioning properly leading to a series of diseasecausing problems namely `` apoe4expressing neurons had higher levels of tau phosphorylation '' the authors write which was `` unrelated to their increased production of amyloidbeta peptides and they displayed gabaergic neuron degeneration '' importantly they also found that `` apoe4 increased amyloidbeta production in human but not in mouse neurons '' '' theres an important species difference in the effect of apoe4 on amyloid beta '' explains first study author chengzhong wang '' increased amyloid beta production is not seen in mouse neurons and could potentially explain some of the discrepancies between mice and humans regarding drug efficacy this will be very important information for future drug development '' chengzhong wang correcting the faulty gene next dr huang and team wanted to see whether it was the loss of apoe3 or the accumulation of apoe4 that caused the disease so they compared neurons that did not produce either the e3 or the e4 variant of the protein with cells that had apoe4 added to them the former continued to behave normally while adding apoe4 led to alzheimerslike pathologies this confirmed the fact that it is the presence of the apoe4 that causes the disease as a final step dr huang and his team looked for ways in which to fix the faulty gene to this end they applied a previously developed apoe4 `` structure corrector '' the socalled structure corrector has been shown in previous research led by the same dr huang to change the structure of apoe4 so that it looks and behaves more like the inoffensive apoe3 applying this compound to human apoe4 neurons corrected the defects thereby eliminating signs of the disease restoring normal cell function and helping the cells to live longer the researchers conclude '' treatment of apoe4expressing neurons with a smallmolecule structure corrector ameliorated the detrimental effects thus showing that correcting the pathogenic conformation of apoe4 is a viable therapeutic approach for apoe4related alzheimers disease ''you wake up in the middle of the night convinced that an evil figure is lying in wait you attempt to move but your body just will not budge you try to scream but nothing comes out the monster draws closer it may sound like a horror movie scene but this is the real deal youre experiencing sleep paralysis sleep paralysis is like a waking nightmare and the underlying causes for this condition remain unclear this terrifying and mysterious sleep disorder or parasomnia has been experienced by people possibly since the dawn of humankind and it may have given rise to numerous ghost stories and mysterious accounts involving `` things that go bump in the night '' this most unsettling experience was first clearly documented in a medical treatise in the 17th century by dutch physician isbrand van diembroeck who wrote about the case of a woman `` 50 years of age in good plight health strong '' yet who complained of mysterious experiences at night '' when she was composing her self to sleep '' explains van diembroeck `` sometimes she believed the devil lay upon her and held her down sometimes that she was choked by a great dog or thief lying upon her breast so that she could hardly speak or breathe and when she endeavored to throw off the burden she was not able to stir her members '' what the woman in van dimbroecks account likely experienced was a condition that has come to be known as `` sleep paralysis '' researchers define it as `` a common generally benign parasomnia characterized by brief episodes of inability to move or speak combined with waking consciousness '' sleep paralysis and hallucinations the reason why sleep paralysis is so scary is not just because you will suddenly become alert but realize that you are in fact unable to move a muscle or utter a sound but also because this experience is often as in the case above accompanied by terrifying hallucinations these as specialized literature has now ascertained typically fall into three distinct categories a sensed presence or intruder hallucinations in which the person feels the presence of an evil threatening individual incubus hallucinations in which the person might feel someone or something pressing down uncomfortably even painfully on their chest or abdomen or trying to choke them vestibularmotor hallucinations during which the individual thinks that they are floating flying or moving these may also sometimes include outofbody experiences in which a person thinks that their spirit or mind has left their body and is moving and observing events from above among the types of dreamlike hallucinations listed above the first type a sensed presence is one of the most commonly experienced by people with sleep paralysis as for the time of sleep at which sleep paralysis with or without hallucinations normally takes place again there is no single answer according to a study that was published in the journal of sleep research sleep paralysis typically happens soon after falling asleep or hypnagogic episodes at some point during the course of sleep or hypnomesic episodes or a little before the persons usual time of awakening or hypnopompic episodes the authors of that study note that the most common instances of sleep paralysis are hypnomesic and that they usually take place after 1–3 hours from falling asleep a strange shadowy man in fact these visions and sensations can seem so realistic to many people that they may think that they are having a paranormal experience or even being subjected to strange tests and rituals the most common hallucination linked to sleep paralysis is the sensed presence of a sinister figure '' witness accounts '' of such hallucinations can be truly unsettling and a number of longtime experients such as louid proud in his book dark intrusions have offered detailed accounts of years of uncanny nightly encounters one person who told me about his nightmarish hallucinations said he felt as if `` someone knelt on his chest so that it felt as if he was being choked out '' another person spoke of a nighttime assailant that takes pleasure in tormenting her in myriad ways '' when sleep paralysis strikes i get both visual and auditory hallucinations which most often involve a strange shadowy man coming up my stairs and into my bedroom occasionally hell prod or tickle me '' often she told me this sinister figure even `` coopts '' her partner in his mischief '' sometimes '' she says `` ill even hallucinate my partner lying next to me and laughing maliciously at me or siding with the shadowy figure in annoying me this is very frustrating since all i want him to do is help me '' given the intensity of these hallucinatory experiences it may come as no surprise that researchers have repeatedly argued that hallucinations linked with sleep paralysis can be held responsible for many reports of magical events sightings of ghouls and demons and alien abductions some happy exceptions although usually people with sleep paralysis report experiencing terrifying hallucinations a happy few actually point to a state of bliss that makes them look forward to these episodes a study that was conducted by james allan cheyne from the university of waterloo in ontario canada suggests that the people who most often describe experiencing positive feelings and sensations during an episode of sleep paralysis are those who are prone to vestibularmotor hallucinations '' these hallucinations were found to involve feelings of floating and outofbody experiences which are associated with feelings of bliss rather than fear '' james allan cheyne '' in contrast to the otheroriented nature of the intruder and incubus hallucinations '' he adds `` these experiences are very much focused on the experients own person '' sometimes cheyne continues feelings of bliss during sleep paralysis are derived from pleasant erotic sensations that arise from vestibularmotor hallucinations what is the underlying mechanism so what happens in the body during an episode of sleep paralysis essentially during the dream phase of sleep known as the rapid eye movement rem phase our skeletal muscles are paralyzed the reasons behind this are not fully understood though researchers have been making progress in uncovering the mechanisms attached to this process insomnia why your brain may sleep without even knowing it people who have insomnia may actually fall asleep for short stretches of time without realizing it how come they dont know it happens read now one popular theory posits that this temporary state of paralysis is meant to prevent us from hurting ourselves perhaps in automatic response to some violent dream during sleep paralysis paradoxically our brains or parts of our brains become awake and conscious but the rest of the body is still immobilized at the same time during sleep paralysis many people experience dream visions and sensations as though they were real hence the hallucinations and the fact that they are in fact partly awake and conscious blurs the line between reality and dreams who is at risk of sleep paralysis sleep paralysis is more common than we may think a 2016 study declares that it is `` surprisingly common '' but that `` determining accurate prevalence rates is complicated '' because researchers and study participants alike have different understandings of what counts as sleep paralysis although a fair amount of research has been conducted in this respect it remais unclear as to who is most at risk of sleep paralysis a recent review of the available data however suggests that 76 percent of the population have experienced at least one episode throughout their lives that said the numbers may be even higher what causes sleep paralysis and what the main risks are for experiencing such an episode remain largely mysterious sleep paralysis is a common symptom of the neurological disorder `` narcolepsy '' which is characterized by uncontrollable sleepiness throughout the waking day but many people who experience sleep paralysis do so independently of neurological conditions and to distinguish between narcolepsyrelated episodes and independently occurring sleep paralysis specialists usually refer to the latter as `` isolated sleep paralysis '' recurrent isolated sleep paralysis often starts in adolescence and around 283 percent of students apparently experience it moreover people with poor `` sleep hygiene '' for instance those who sleep too much or too little may also be more likely to experience sleep paralysis the authors of a systematic review published in sleep medicine reviews note '' specifically excessively short fewer than 6 hours or long over 9 hours sleep duration and napping especially long naps over 2 hours were associated with increased odds of sleep paralysis '' '' long selfreported sleep latency how long it takes to fall asleep over 30 minutes and difficulty initiating sleep were related to an increased likelihood of reporting sleep paralysis '' they add are mental health issues to blame given the frightening nature of the most of the hallucinations associated with sleep paralysis many have wondered whether individuals experiencing mental health issues such as depression or anxiety are more susceptible to these experiences the results of existing research however are mixed some have argued that individuals who have experienced abuse in early life whether or not they remember it may be more exposed to sleep paralysis according to the study that was published in sleep medicine reviews `` levels of waking state dissociative experiences involving depersonalisation derealisation and amnesia were found to be related to both sleep paralysis frequency and the frequencyintensity of all three hallucination types '' but links to other neurological and psychiatric disorders are more uncertain the authors of a study that was published in the journal consciousness and cognition note that previous research has tried to make a case that bipolar disorder posttraumatic stress disorder depression panic disorder and generalized anxiety disorder to name but a few may play a role in sleep paralysis however they report that their analysis of the available data has revealed `` no general relationship between isolated sleep paralysis and major psychopathology '' instead they decided to focus on the most common `` symptom '' of sleep paralysis that is sensed presence hallucinations that induce a feeling of fear and explained that there may be a link between it and what they call `` passive social imagery '' passive social imagery refers to the experience of individuals who are prone to being more socially anxious and to imagining themselves in embarrassing or distressing social situations as the passive victim on the receiving end of abuse these individuals the researchers suggest appear to be more at risk of experiencing distress due to sensed presence hallucinations what can you do to prevent it prevention and coping strategies for sleep paralysis are unfortunately mostly anecdotal but there are some methods that seem to have been repeatedly validated by many individuals who say that they usually or often work for them these include trying not to fall asleep on on your back since studies have associated episodes of sleep paralysis with lying on ones back when going to sleep trying to ensure on a regular basis that your sleep will not be disrupted since repeatedly waking up during the night has been flagged up as a potential risk factor avoiding overuse of stimulants such as tobacco and alcohol coffee surprisingly has not been deemed risky in this context though the evidence that these affect the chances of experiencing sleep paralysis is mixed learning meditation and muscle relaxation techniques may help you to better cope with the experience persisting in the attempt `` to move extremities '' such as fingers or toes during sleep paralysis also seems to help disrupt the experience finally if you regularly experience sleep paralysis with `` sensed presence '' and you think that this may be related to other experiences of anxiety in your daytoday life then it may be worth considering cognitive behavioral therapy according to the authors of the consciousness and cognition study there is a distinct `` possibility that frightening isolated sleep paralysis sensed presence experiences may contribute to maintenance of an individuals negative social imagery biases '' if that is the case they argue `` cognitive behavioral treatment of these experiences could help to alleviate the more general social imagery dysfunction '' which may improve the overall situation we picked linked items based on the quality of products and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you we partner with some of the companies that sell these products which means healthline uk and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a links aboveboth swine flu and bird flu created a stir in recent years now a new threat may be on the horizon a new study demonstrates that the influenza virus can jump from pigs to canines canine influenza viruses are growing in number usually influenza pandemics are sparked when a virus jumps from birds to pigs and then eventually to humans influenza viruses in an animal population where there are many viral strains in one place can mix together to create new forms when new strains jump to humans our immune systems which have no experience of these unknown pathogens fail to protect us for instance the 2009 h1n1 pandemic was caused by a virus that began in birds then it moved into pigs where it picked up new genes from flu viruses already present in swine before leaping into humans generally birds and swine are considered the most dangerous melting pots for the influenza virus viruses in dogs and horses seem to have much less viral genetic diversity influenza and dogs although much less common 15 years ago researchers documented an influenza virus that had entered a horse before jumping into a canine this became the first circulating canine influenza virus then just 5 years ago a canine influenza virus of avian origin was discovered in farmed dogs in china a new study published this week in the journal mbio moves the story on another step how to avoid catching the flu although complete immunity cant be guaranteed here are some tips that might protect you from getting sick read now the scientists who are based at the center for research on influenza pathogenesis icahn school of medicine at mount sinai in new york city ny looked in detail at the genomes of 16 influenza viruses from dogs in southern chinas guangxi autonomous region the viruses were detected in dogs that attended veterinary clinics due to respiratory problems the authors explain their findings and their importance '' what we have found is another set of viruses that come from swine that are originally avian in origin and now they are jumping into dogs and have been reassorted with other viruses in dogs '' '' we now have h1n1 h3n2 and h3n8 in dogs they are starting to interact with each other this is very reminiscent of what happened in swine 10 years before the h1n1 pandemic '' next steps and new concerns this new virus that the researchers found is h1n1 but it is distinct from the strain that caused the previous epidemic to the next step will be to test the virus on human serum '' if there is a lot of immunity against these viruses '' says investigator dr adolfo garcíasastre `` they will represent less of a risk but we now have one more host in which influenza virus is starting to have a diverse genotypic and phenotypic characteristics creating diversity in a host which is in very close contact to humans '' it may be that humans already have protection against this particular strain but that does not take the concern away entirely '' the diversity in dogs has increased so much now that the type of combinations of viruses that can be created in dogs represent potential risk for a virus to jump to a dog into a human '' dr adolfo garcíasastre in the united states whenever avian flu is detected in a population of birds they are culled this would be an unpopular solution if the virus was to infect domestic dogs dr garcíasastre says `` there are attempts to restrict influenza virus in pigs through vaccination and one could consider vaccination for dogs '' hopefully interventions of that nature wont be necessary but only time will tell whether dog flu could become a serious reason for concernscientists in the united kingdom and china find that a new drug for type 2 diabetes may protect the brain from damage caused by alzheimers disease after testing it in mice could a diabetes drug help to treat alzheimers disease in a new paper published in the journal brain research the researchers explain how the `` tripleaction '' drug resulted in a significant reversal of memory loss in mice that were genetically engineered to develop humanlike alzheimers disease the new drug `` holds clear promise of being developed into a new treatment for chronic neurodegenerative disorders such as alzheimers disease '' says study leader christian hölscher a professor in the faculty of health and medicine at lancaster university in the uk alzheimers is a brainwasting disease that accounts for 50–75 percent of cases of dementia which is a condition wherein people gradually lose their ability to think remember make decisions hold a conversation and look after themselves as the disease progresses the brain undergoes biological and chemical changes and particular areas shrink as nerve cells or neurons die the exact causes of alzheimers are currently unknown but microscopic examinations of affected brain tissue have revealed two hallmarks abnormal accumulations of protein segments known as `` plaques '' and `` tangles '' current treatments make no real difference the number of people with alzheimers disease is rising rapidly as the population ages in 2015 there were an estimated 468 million people worldwide living with dementia and this number is expected to reach more than 130 million in 2050 in the united states where alzheimers is currently the sixth leading cause of death there are an estimated 5 million people living with alzheimers disease this is expected to rise to 16 million by 2050 accompanied by a significant rise in costs to the us the cost of alzheimers and other causes of dementia in 2017 was estimated to be $ 259 billion and is expected to rise to $ 11 trillion by 2050 at present there is no cure for alzheimers disease and there are also no treatments that make a significant difference to the symptoms drug raises activity of three growth factors type 2 diabetes is a disease that results from insulin resistance a condition in which cells become less sensitive to insulin and therefore less able to take in glucose from the bloodstream to use as energy the pancreas makes more insulin to compensate but eventually it will be unable to keep up and blood glucose levels will rise leading to prediabetes diabetes and other health problems could an existing oxygen therapy treat alzheimers learn how hyperbaric oxygen therapy might alleviate some physical and behavioral symptoms of alzheimers read now the drug that prof hölscher and his group tested in the new study is a `` triple receptor agonist '' that activates the proteins that allow signals from three growth factors called glucagonlike peptide1 glucosedependent insulinotropic polypeptide and glucagon to enter cells previous studies have revealed that type 2 diabetes is a risk factor for alzheimers and problems with growth factor signaling have been detected in the brains of people with the disease the new study is the first to show that a triple receptor agonist may protect the brain from the progressive brain damage that occurs in alzheimers disease consistent neuroprotective effects the researchers tested the drug on aged appps1 mice whose brains were in the advanced stages of degeneration appps1 mice are engineered `` transgenic mice '' that carry versions of human genes that are linked to an inherited form of alzheimers in a maze learning test the treated mice showed improved memory formation also examination of their brain tissue showed a reduction in amyloid plaques inflammation and oxidative stress treated mice showed higher rates of new nerve cell generation and celltocell connections and increased levels of a growth factor called brainderived neurotrophic factor which protects nerve cells '' these very promising outcomes '' says prof hölscher `` demonstrate the efficacy of these novel multiplereceptor drugs that originally were developed to treat type 2 diabetes but have shown consistent neuroprotective effects in several studies '' he notes that clinical studies that used an older version of the same type of drug have already shown `` very promising results in people with alzheimers disease or with mood disorders '' the researchers believe that their findings point to a `` promising '' direction in which to look for new treatments for alzheimers disease '' here we show that a novel triple receptor drug shows promise as a potential treatment for alzheimers but further doseresponse tests and direct comparisons with other drugs have to be conducted in order to evaluate if this new drug is superior to previous ones '' prof christian hölscheranhedonia or the inability to feel pleasure during pleasurable activities occurs as a part of a number of conditions it is also considered a central feature of depression in this spotlight feature we explore whats happening in the brain anhedonia accompanies a range of neuropsychiatric conditions most people will at some point in their life lose interest in things that used to excite them anhedonia however takes this loss to its limits it becomes impossible to draw enjoyment from things that once elicited excitement such as music sex food and conversation aside from major depressive disorder it can occur as part of other conditions including schizophrenia psychosis and parkinsons disease as well as anorexia nervosa and substance abuse disorders it may even play a part in an individuals desire to indulge in risky behaviors such as skydiving over recent years anhedonia has received increased attention part of the reason for this is that it predicts how well someone with depression will respond to treatment common antidepressants tend to work less well for people who have depression with anhedonia than for those who have depression without anhedonia because treating depression is so challenging any additional insight is welcome there is evidence to suggest that the presence of anhedonia increases the risk of committing suicide so if the link is proven recognizing and dealing with anhedonia could save lives what does anhedonia feel like to gain a better understanding of what anhedonia feels like the following is an excerpt from a firsthand account '' for the past 7 years i have had the smallest flickering of emotions what i feel on a daily basis is practically nil i have no desires to truly speak of as nothing i do is rewarding or satisfying this is the core of my anhedonia a symptom of major depression '' '' essentially i gain nothing from my daily life my world is cold and as such it makes life seem the same way everything i look at everything i do looks and feels the same '' whats happening in the brain as with the investigation of any emotional response the story is not a simple one the brains circuitry is dense convoluted and incredibly busy anhedonia is not simply a reduced appreciation of the taste of chocolate the underlying reward mechanisms are impaired this might involve alterations in levels of interest motivation anticipation expectation and effort prediction all of which are complex in their own right and all of which are processed by different but overlapping neural circuits anhedonia and reward there is evidence that many individuals with anhedonia can experience pleasure in a similar way to the rest of the population its just that there is something amiss as far as motivation anticipation and reward are concerned anhedonia seems to interfere with reward mechanisms for people with anhedonia the reward process has come unhinged finding which part of this process has become unshackled is a difficult job in order to understand the interplay between the different aspects of pleasure i will relay an example if we experience something and enjoy it eating a new type of candy for instance we might want to do it again however if the candy costs $ 1000 per piece we might not bother or similarly if it is known to cause cancer we will probably give it a miss if the candy is free and safe however we will tuck in if we are required to walk to the next room to get a piece we will probably make the effort but if it is stationed half a mile away we might pause for thought and if its in the next town we will forgo the pleasure but even if the candy is healthful placed on the table next to us and free of charge we might take a piece even if we have just eaten a threecourse meal desire motivation and the pleasure we derive from things are fluid although this particular example is simplistic it shows how our brains make computations about risks rewards and payoffs using multiple brain regions often without our conscious input with this in mind where should we start well for many years a part of the basal ganglia called the nucleus accumbens has been referred to as the `` pleasure center '' unsurprisingly it is implicated in anhedonia recent studies have shown that other brain areas are also involved including the prefrontal cortex which is involved in planning and personality expression the amygdala which processes emotions and is involved in decisionmaking the striatum which is the area that houses the nucleus accumbens implicated in the reward system the insula which is thought to be important in consciousness and selfawareness the prefrontal cortex seems important in highlevel processing of rewards including costbenefit analysis and decisionmaking its connections to the ventral striatum seem to be particularly important in motivation and therefore anhedonia the role of neurotransmitters neurotransmitter imbalances have also been investigated in relation to anhedonia dopamine is of particular interest due to its involvement in reward pathways as well as the fact that it is expressed in high quantities in the nucleus accumbens in fact reduced dopamine expression in the ventral striatum of depressed people was found to correlate well with anhedonia severity but not depressive symptoms overall dopamines relationship with anhedonia and reward is a complex one though reduced dopamine levels in different parts of the brain can have different effects linking depression insomnia and the brains reward center a study finds that increased activity in a brain region responsible for rewardrelated functions reduces the risk of depression related to sleep problems read now as an example increased dopamine in the insula has the opposite effect on effortbased decisionmaking to increased dopamine in the ventral striatum so dopamine is unlikely to tell the whole story gaba an inhibitory neurotransmitter glutamate an excitatory neurotransmitter serotonin and opioids may also play their part for instance people with depression who also have pronounced anhedonia seem to have reduced gaba levels and depressed people with reduced opioid activity experience less pleasure during positive interactions a possible role for inflammation depression and inflammation have been linked for some time scientists have measured increased levels of inflammatory compounds in people with depression these chemical hallmarks include cytokines and creactive proteins cytokines shown here may be involved in anhedonia a study of people with depression published in the journal molecular psychiatry in 2015 found that increased levels of creactive protein were associated with reduced connectivity between the ventral striatum and ventromedial prefrontal cortex which is important in motivation and increased anhedonia other studies have produced similar findings so inflammation appears to be involved in both depression and anhedonia although a link between anhedonia and inflammation seems perhaps unexpected it makes sense when one peels back the layers cytokines can influence neurotransmitter metabolism and brain activity also cytokines promote socalled sickness behavior including lethargy malaise loss of appetite sleepiness and sensitivity to pain all of which have parallels in depression and people who undergo cytokine treatment for cancer often report depressive symptoms although we do not have a full understanding of the origins of anhedonia the research to date tells us that it is multifaceted and quite possibly different from person to person treating anhedonia at present there are no treatments aimed at anhedonia it is commonly treated alongside the condition that it is part of for instance selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors are often prescribed for individuals with depression there is a growing body of evidence that standard depression treatments do little for anhedonia and worse still may add to the problem by causing emotional blunting sexual anhedonia and anorgasmia or the inability to orgasm this negative interaction might be because serotonin inhibits dopamine release in certain brain regions potentially interfering with the reward motivation and pleasure circuitry on a positive note there has been recent interest in the anesthetic ketamine as a potential antianhedonic medication ketamine has shown promise as a treatment for depression quickly reducing symptoms in both major depressive disorder and bipolar disorder a study that was published in the journal nature in 2014 specifically set out to see whether it could also have an effect on anhedonia trials in rodents had already generated interesting results but this was the first time that ketamine had been investigated in humans specifically the study looked at treatmentresistant bipolar disorder the authors concluded that `` ketamine rapidly reduced the levels of anhedonia '' in fact the reduction occurred within 40 minutes and lasted up to 14 days following a single injection interestingly the reduction occurred without a similar reduction in depressive symptoms ketamine blocks nmethyldaspartate receptors thereby preventing them from being activated by glutamate this infers that glutamate an excitatory neurotransmitter might play a role in anhedonia there is still a long way to go before the many strands of anhedonia are fully understood however our knowledge is slowly growing and with time there is hope of a solution to this highly intrusive and debilitating maladyresearchers have discovered a mechanism through which toxic protein clusters develop in the brain in parkinsons disease it may be treatable with drugs approved for another disease the buildup of toxic proteins in parkinsons disease could be halted with an already approved drug in a paper published in the journal neuron the scientists describe how they discovered that increasing a fatty substance or lipid called glucosylceramide causes a buildup of toxic clusters of alphasynuclein protein inside dopamineproducing brain cells the team also revealed that treatment with an already approved glucosylceramide synthase inhibitor a drug that reduces production of the lipid reduced the toxic protein clusters which are a hallmark of parkinsons disease '' some companies '' says senior study author joseph mazzulli an assistant professor of neurology at northwestern university feinberg school of medicine in chicago il `` have been using synthase inhibitors to reduce the synthesis of the lipid and we used a similar compound on patientderived neurons in our study '' '' we were able to show it reduced toxic alphasynuclein aggregation directly within neurons derived from parkinsons patients '' he adds parkinsons arises from dopamine cell death parkinsons disease is a progressive condition that arises from the death of cells in a brain region known as the substantia nigra the cells produce a chemical messenger called dopamine that is important for regulating movement the main symptoms of parkinsons disease are tremors slowness of movement and stiffness as well as reduced balance and coordination other symptoms include emotional changes sleep disruption depression difficulty speaking problems with swallowing and chewing and constipation parkinsons mostly strikes after the age of 60 although a small number of cases are diagnosed in those under the age of 50 as the symptoms worsen it gets harder to cope with everyday tasks and lead an independent life there are more than 10 million people living with parkinsons worldwide including around 1 million in the united states where approximately 60000 cases are diagnosed every year alone while there is as yet no cure for parkinsons disease there are drugs and other treatments that offer symptom relief for many patients gba1 mutations and parkinsons disease in the study paper prof mazzulli and team explain that a strong risk factor for the development of toxic alphasynuclein clusters in parkinsons is mutations in the glucocerebrosidase gba1 gene the gene produces a protein that is important for the correct functioning of lysosomes which are compartments inside cells that break down and clear away glucosylceramide and other lipids parkinsons disease how toxic proteins damage healthy brain cells a study reveals for the first time how toxic clumps of alphasynuclein drill holes in healthy brain cells to disrupt their function read now those with one mutated copy of gba1 have higherthannormal levels of the glucosylceramide and have a greater risk of developing parkinsons disease having two mutated copies of the gene one from each parent can lead to gauchers disease which is a rare disorder wherein lysosomes fail and fatty compounds build up in the body however although it is known that gba1 mutations are linked perhaps through the disruption of glucosylceramide clearance to the development of toxic alphasynuclein clusters what has not been clear until the new study is the mechanism behind it mutated gba1 may not be necessary to investigate the scientists tested the effects of a drug that raises levels of glucosylceramide in dopamineproducing neurons grown from patientderived stem cells the cells did not have mutated forms of the gba1 gene they discovered that even without the mutated gene there was a significant buildup of toxic alphasynuclein clusters in the neurons prof mazzulli suggests that this indicates that the conversion of normal alphasynuclein into its toxic form did not necessarily depend on `` the presence of the mutated gba1 protein but more importantly the decreased activity and accumulation of glucosylceramide '' complex alphasynuclein and toxic clusters on closer investigation of the conversion of alphasynuclein from its normal to toxic form the team discovered that it was not just the simple form of alphasynuclein as previously thought that converted into a toxic cluster instead glucosylceramide was directly converting the complex form of alphasynuclein into toxic clusters `` we were surprised to find that toxic aggregation occurred by direct conversion of the large alphasynuclein complex '' prof mazzulli explains '' we thought '' he continues `` that the complex would have to first disassemble before forming toxic aggregates but thats not what our data indicated '' he says that drugs devised for the treatment of gauchers disease might be one way to target this mechanism these findings also offer a way to measure how well drugs might perform in trials while the goal of parkinsons treatment is to reduce alphasynuclein clusters measuring levels of the toxic protein in living patients is not straightforward '' its far easier to measure the effects of therapeutics that alter glucosylceramide in patients since the lipid can be directly measured from easily accessible fluids such as blood or cerebral spinal fluid '' prof joseph mazzullia new study now published in the journal psychotherapy and psychosomatics has found a link between a common class of stomach drugs called proton pump inhibitors and depression the researchers suggest that the pills might lead to major depressive disorder by disrupting the guts bacteria common stomach drugs may trigger depression by disrupting the gutbrain axis suggests new research more and more studies are now pointing to the numerous ways in which our gut bacteria may influence both our mental and emotional wellbeing for instance researchers have found that germfree mice that had been deprived of beneficial gut bacteria displayed symptoms of anxiety depression and cognitive impairment since the bacteria in our gut can alter the function of our brain by producing certain hormones or neurotransmitters and emotional responses can in turn affect our gut bacteria it should come as no surprise that some studies have found a link between posttraumatic stress disorder and certain strains of bacteria other studies have not only pinpointed specific bacteria whose absence can trigger symptoms of depression in rodents but they have also shown that supplementing said bacteria can reverse signs of depression now an observational study suggests that proton pump inhibitors which are a class of drugs typically prescribed to treat acidrelated stomach conditions such as gastroesophageal reflux disease increase the risk of developing major depressive disorder this is the leading cause of disability both in the united states and worldwide the first author of the new study is weisheng huang from the department of psychiatry at the taipei veterans general hospital in taiwan stomach acid pills may disrupt gutbrain axis huang and team examined data on 2366 individuals who had been taking proton pump inhibitors and went on to develop depression and compared them with 9464 people who also took the drugs but did not develop depression the latter group of participants was `` matched for age sex enrollment time end point time and followup period '' antidepressants do they really work we take a critical look at the effectiveness of these commonly prescribed drugs read now the researchers applied logistic regression analysis and adjusted for various demographic factors as well as for psychiatric comorbidities such as anxiety and substance abuse disorders the study revealed that compared with those who did not develop major depressive disorder `` patients with major depression had a greater prevalence of higher cumulative defined daily dose '' of proton pump inhibitors specifically the risk of clinical depression increased for those who took the drugs pantoprazole lansoprazole and rabeprazole while in those who used omeprazole and esomeprazole `` only a trend significance was noted '' '' to our knowledge '' write the study authors `` this was the first study to investigate the association between proton pump inhibitor exposure and the risk of major depression '' while the mechanisms behind such an association remain mysterious the authors venture a couple of possible explanations the drugs might raise depression risk by dysregulating the gutbrain axis they suggest or by preventing the organism from properly absorbing nutrients after the use of stomach drugs still the researchers caution that physicians should continue to prescribe the drugs as and when needed bearing in mind the range of side effects that these drugs may have which include pneumonia bone fracture and gastrointestinal infections huang and team recommend that future studies investigate the pathophysiology behind the association they foundcolorectal cancer is quite common especially among the aging population an important risk factor for colorectal cancer is diet and dietary choices are also vital during and after treatment in this spotlight we give you an overview of which diets are best and which are best avoided what does a good diet for preventing colorectal cancer and for aiding cancer treatment look like colorectal cancer is a type of cancer that affects a persons rectum colon or both this is also known as the large intestine according to the american cancer society acs 2018 could bring around 97220 new diagnoses of colon cancer and 43030 new cases of rectal cancer to the united states this type of cancer is more likely to appear in older individuals but there are many other risk factors associated with its emergence such as genetic and lifestyle factors of the latter one of the most cited risk factors is diet referring specifically to poor dietary habits that often also lead to obesity below we look at which foods and nutrients have been said to raise the risk of colorectal cancer and which types of diet have been deemed helpful in its prevention we also cover the diets most likely to keep the body resilient during and after treatment for this type of cancer prevention what to avoid numerous studies have indicated that a diet too rich in red meat is associated with a heightened risk of colorectal cancer `` red meat '' is defined by the world health organization who as `` all mammalian muscle meat including beef veal pork lamb mutton horse and goat '' eating a lot of red meat is known to significantly increase the risk of colorectal cancer a review of the evidence supporting this link notes that `` consumption of red meat might be related directly to the incidence of colorectal cancer or indirectly because a diet high in meat tends to be low in vegetables fruit and fiber '' a study of north italian populations showed that individuals who eat red meat alongside eggs cheese and other fatty foods as well as refined starches on a frequent basis had an almost twice higher risk of developing rectal or colon cancer than their peers who favored a plantbased diet more recent research also revealed that `` a daily increase of 100 grams of all meat or red meat is associated with a significant 12–17 percent increased risk of colorectal cancer '' in 2015 a report published by the international agency for research on cancer made the news by pointing out that every 50gram portion of processed meat such as bacon or salami eaten every day increases a persons risk of developing colorectal cancer by 18 percent this evidence led the who to classify processed meats as `` carcinogenic to humans '' the damage caused by unwholesome diets made the headlines again in early 2018 when a study published in the bmj reported that `` ultraprocessed foods '' might increase the risk of developing various types of cancer prevention what to eat so if a high intake of red meat and processed foods contributes to the risk of colorectal cancer what should be eaten to protect our bodies from this outcome in order to reduce the risk of colorectal cancer eat a healthful diet that favors fruit and veg according to the acs a diet high in fruits vegetables and fibers could help to minimize the risk and many existing studies seem to support this advice a study from the loma linda university in california found that vegetarianstyle diets are linked to a decreased risk of colorectal cancer the researchers studied four types of plantbased diet these were vegan or strictly no products of animal origin lactoovo vegetarian which includes dairy and eggs but no meat pescovegetarian which includes fish but no meat semivegetarian which includes meat and fish infrequently all four of these plantbased diets were deemed to be less likely to lead to cancer than nonvegetarian diets one study from last year also suggests that the more colorful your meal the better and that individuals should focus on integrating a rainbow of fruit and vegetables into their diets more specifically their experiments on the pig model which provides the closest resemblance to the human body in terms of metabolic processes indicated that purple potatoes might protect against colon cancer that may be because these root vegetables contain compounds that reduce levels of certain proinflammatory proteins in the body and inflammation is known to contribute to colon cancer risk the state of cancer are we close to a cure are we getting closer to finding a cure for cancer read now recently researchers have also isolated a number of elements typical of mediterraneanstyle diets that could help to prevent the onset of colorectal cancer people with a low risk of developing this condition ate plenty of fruits vegetables nuts and whole grains as well as fish and poultry rather than red meat and they drank little alcohol and soft drinks what to eat during and after treatment according to guidelines from the danafarber cancer institute in boston ma people undergoing treatment for colorectal cancer should also favor the `` rainbow plate '' meals and eat a varied array of fruits and vegetables to support their immune system a diet rich in tree nuts could improve the outcomes of cancer treatment eating small but frequent portions is another approach that specialists at the danafarber institute suggest that people following treatment may find useful they advise patients to stay hydrated and avoid alcohol and caffeine explaining that some types of medication may clash with these beverages but a previous study conducted by researchers at the institute which we covered on medical news today indicated that those undergoing treatment for colorectal cancer had an almost halved risk of cancer recurrence if they drank four cups of coffee or 460 milligrams of caffeine per day as lead study author charles fuchs explains `` we found that coffee drinkers had a lower risk of the cancer coming back and a significantly greater survival and chance of a cure '' research published last year in jama oncology suggests that a diet high in sources of fiber may improve survival rates for patients with stage one colorectal cancer eating whole grains was also linked to a better treatment outcome the researchers noted another study from last year notes that eating a minimum of 2 ounces approximately 57 grams of tree nuts such as cashews hazelnuts walnuts and pistachios almost halved the risk of colon cancer recurrence for individuals following stage three cancer treatment tree nut consumption also reduced the risk of death following treatment by 53 percent as for the risk of developing a second cancer following treatment the acs say that it can be reduced by making the same healthful diet choices advised for the prevention of a first cancer these include maintaining a healthy weight placing `` an emphasis on plant foods '' in daily meals and avoiding alcohol intake in fact dr victor moreno from the university of barcelona in spain and colleagues found that lifestyle factors are more important than genetic risk factors when it comes to the development of colorectal cancer '' this is important considering that lifestyle unlike genetic traits is somewhat modifiable '' first study author dr gemma ibáñez this suggests that a `` revamp '' of personal health choices may go a long way toward supporting positive outcomesresearchers in germany have found further evidence to support the idea that parkinsons could be an autoimmune disease immune cells act differently depending on whether or not a person has parkinsons using a stem cell model they showed how immune cells attacked dopamineproducing cells derived from people with parkinsons disease but not from people without it dopamine is a chemical messenger that supports many important brain functions these include functions that deal with reward emotions pleasure and movement control in parkinsons disease the midbrain neurons or brain cells that make dopamine die off but it is not clear what causes their death as more and more dopamine cells die levels of the chemical messenger drop giving rise to symptoms such as tremor slowness rigidity and problems with balance problems with speech and swallowing also develop as do several nonmovement symptoms estimates suggest that around half a million people in the united states have parkinsons disease autoimmunity and parkinsons autoimmune diseases arise because the immune system attacks healthy organs tissues and cells instead of protecting them there are at least 80 different known types of autoimmune disease including rheumatoid arthritis multiple sclerosis lupus and type 1 diabetes although the idea that parkinsons could be an autoimmune disease is not new the biological evidence to back it up is only just emerging in 2017 for instance a study from the us revealed how pieces of a protein that builds up in the dopamine cells of people with parkinsons can trigger a deadly immune attack against the cells parkinsons sniff test could predict risk up to a decade earlier adults who scored low on a sniff test were found to be almost five times more likely to develop parkinsons disease during a 10year followup read now more recently scientists have linked the use of drugs that subdue the immune system to a lower risk of developing parkinsons disease in the new study researchers from friedrichalexanderuniversität fau in erlangennürnberg germany have shown that t helper 17 th17 cells a type of immune t cell attack dopamine cells derived from people with parkinsons disease but not those derived from people without it they report their findings in the journal cell stem cell '' thanks to our investigations '' says senior study author beate winner a professor in the department of stem cell biology at fau `` we were able to clearly prove not only that t cells are involved in causing parkinsons disease but also what role they actually play '' stem cell model of parkinsons disease together with a team from the movement disorders clinic at university hospital erlangen the fau researchers had earlier discovered that the brains of those with parkinsons had higher levels of th17 cells th17 cells are also found in higher amounts in people with rheumatoid arthritis and other autoimmune diseases the discovery spurred the team to investigate further using a stem cell model of parkinsons disease to develop the model they took skin cells from people with and without parkinsons and induced them to become `` pluripotent stem cells '' pluripotent stem cells have the ability to mature into virtually any type of cell including neurons they coaxed the stem cells to mature into midbrain neurons that make dopamine this meant that they had batches of newly created dopamine cells that were specific to each of the patients the team then exposed each batch of dopamine cells to fresh th17 cells taken from the patients in this way each batch of patientspecific dopamine cells was exposed only to th17 cells that came from that same patient the results showed that while the th17 cells killed many of the dopamine cells from patients with parkinsons this did not happen with the cells that came from patients without the disease in further experiments the scientists also discovered that an antibody that was already in use in the hospital for the treatment of psoriasis was `` able to largely prevent the death '' of the brain cells '' the findings from our study offer a significant basis for new methods of treating parkinsons disease '' prof beate winnera largescale twopart study now published in the lancet public health journal examines the effects of high moderate and low carbohydrate intake on mortality risk the results of a new study could make you think twice before turning down carbs as more and more people are concerned with losing weight the prevalence of the lowcarb diet is increasing however new research points out that both too much carbohydrate and too little in our diet may be a cause for concern also according to the new research if you must choose between two types of lowcarb diet you should choose the one that replaces carbs with plantderived proteins and fats such diets may help prolong life unlike the diets that replace carbs with animal proteins and fat dr sara seidelmann who is a clinical and research fellow in cardiovascular medicine at brigham and womens hospital in boston ma led the research according to her `` lowcarb diets that replace carbohydrates with protein or fat are gaining widespread popularity as a health and weight loss strategy '' however our data suggest that animalbased lowcarbohydrate diets which are prevalent in north america and europe might be associated with shorter overall lifespan and should be discouraged '' '' instead if one chooses to follow a lowcarbohydrate diet then exchanging carbohydrates for more plantbased fats and proteins might actually promote healthy aging in the longterm '' dr sara seidelmann studying carbohydrate intake and mortality dr seidelmann and colleagues explain the motivation for their research previous studies they say have suggested that lowcarb diets are good for weight loss and metabolic health however these findings referred only to the short term the longterm effect of a low consumption of carbs on mortality risk has not garnered enough attention in the research community and the studies that have examined the matter yielded conflicting results also studies have not yet looked at the fat and protein sources in these lowcarb diets and their impact on mortality risk fats or carbs what causes obesity a new study settles the debate read now to remedy this the researchers studied over 15400 people aged 45–64 who registered in the atherosclerosis risk in communities study in 1987–1989 the male study participants reported an intake of 600–4200 kilocalories per day on average while the females said that they consumed 500–3600 kilocaleries per day the participants answered questions about their dietary habits both at the beginning of the study and 6 years later at followup the questionnaire asked about what types of food and drink the participants consumed in what portions and with what frequency then the scientists analyzed the link between overall carbohydrate consumption and mortality from any cause in the second stage of the study the team conducted a metaanalysis of cohort studies that summed up over 430000 people from across the world moderatecarb plantbased diet may be ideal the first part of the study revealed that both a low intake of carbs less than 40 percent of the total energy intake coming from carbs and a high intake or over 70 percent correlated with a higher risk of premature mortality by comparison a moderate carb intake of 50–55 percent of the total energy was found to correlate with 4 more years of life expectancy compared with people who consumed too little carbohydrate the second part of the study reinforced these findings and found that replacing carbs with animal proteins in a lowcarb diet correlated with a higher risk of mortality than consuming carbs in moderation '' too much and too little carbohydrate can be harmful but what counts most is the type of fat protein and carbohydrate '' says study coauthor walter willett a professor of epidemiology and nutrition at the harvard t h chan school of public health in boston ma senior study author dr scott solomon a professor of medicine at harvard medical school weighs in on the findings '' this work '' he says `` provides the most comprehensive study of carbohydrate intake that has been done to date and helps us better understand the relationship between the specific components of diet and longterm health '' '' while a randomized trial has not been performed to compare the longerterm effects of different types of lowcarbohydrate diets these data suggest that shifting towards a more plantbased consumption is likely to help attenuate major morbid disease '' dr scott solomonnew research has found that fasting triggers a molecule that can delay the aging of our arteries the findings could help prevent agerelated chronic diseases such as cancer cardiovascular disease and alzheimers scientists have discovered a new role for a molecule produced during fasting it can keep our vascular system supple and young the search for eternal youth has preoccupied the human imagination since the times of ancient greece in fact a quick look at greek mythology shows that youth was more prized than immortality as some myths tell the story of how futile the latter is if its not accompanied by the former in this regard modern medicine has recently been catching up with ancient mythology emerging scientific breakthroughs encourage us to hope that the myth of eternal youth will soon become a reality in a recent study researchers were able to reverse signs of aging such as hair loss and wrinkles in mice and perhaps more impressively another team of researchers managed to rejuvenate aging human cells now a new study adds to the evidence that aging can indeed be reversed scientists led by dr minghui zou the director of the center for molecular and translational medicine at georgia state university in atlanta showed that fasting or restricting calorie intake can produce a molecule that delays vascular aging the findings were published in the journal molecular cell how a ketone molecule keeps cells young dr zou explains the motivation for this study saying `` the most important part of aging is vascular aging when people become older the vessels that supply different organs are the most sensitive and more subject to aging damage so studying vascular aging is very important '' so the scientists set out to focus on vascular aging on the changes that occur with senescence and on ways to prevent them could this hormone rejuvenate memory a hormone produced in our bones may prevent agerelated cognitive decline read now specifically the researchers looked at the link between calorie restriction and vascular aging dr zou used mouse models of atherosclerosis studied their aortas postmortem and performed a series of cell culture experiments they also induced starvation in the rodents and conducted similar tests they saw that as expected the starving mice produced the molecule betahydroxybutyrate surprisingly however this molecule also prevented vascular aging betahydroxybutyrate is a ketone that is a molecule produced by the liver and used as an energy source when glucose is not available the body produces ketones during fasting or starvation on lowcarb diets and after prolonged exercise interestingly the research also revealed that betahydroxybutyrate promotes the division and multiplication of the cells that line the inside of blood vessels cellular division is a marker of cellular youth '' we found that betahydroxybutyrate can delay vascular aging thats actually providing a chemical link between calorie restriction and fasting and the antiaging effect '' dr minghui zou '' this compound can delay vascular aging through endothelial cells '' dr zou explains `` which line the interior surface of blood vessels and lymphatic vessels it can prevent one type of cell aging called senescence or cellular aging '' a drug target to stop aging chronic disease the study also revealed that the compound triggers another chain reaction that keeps the dna of these endothelial cells young and undamaged more specifically when betahydroxybutyrate attaches to the rnabinding protein heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein a1 it boosts the activity of a stem cell transcriptional factor called octamerbinding transcriptional factor oct4 in turn oct4 `` increases lamin b1 a key factor against dna damageinduced senescence '' which keeps the blood vessels young '' this stem cell factor oct4 '' says dr zou `` could be a pharmaceutical or pharmacological target for slowing down or preventing aging '' '' then if the vascular system becomes younger it is less likely to have cardiovascular disease alzheimers disease and cancer because all of these diseases are agerelated '' dr minghui zou '' we think this is a very important discovery and we are working on finding a new chemical that can mimic the effect of this ketone bodys function '' dr zou adds '' its difficult to convince people not to eat for the next 24 hours to increase the concentration of this compound and not everybody can do that but if we can find something that can mimic this effect and people can still eat it would make life more enjoyable and help fight disease ''hot tea is a staple beverage in winter time it can help to keep us warm and soothe sore throats it can give us that energy boost in the morning or help to relax us in the afternoon however a new study suggests that drinking hot tea may have serious negative consequences for some of us many of us enjoy a hot cup of tea but could we be putting ourselves at risk without knowing it across the world hot tea is a muchloved drink euromonitor international estimate that around 29 million tons of tea were consumed in 2016 alone this comes as no surprise seeing that teas are tasty and can bring many health benefits often brought about by the antioxidant effects of compounds such as polyphenols however a recent study from peking university in beijing china has found that the temperature at which tea is consumed could affect health particularly in certain groups already at risk of negative health outcomes lead study author jun lv a doctoral student from peking universitys department of epidemiology and biostatistics found that the consumption of hot tea correlates with the onset of esophageal cancer according to the world cancer research fund international esophageal cancer is the eighth most common type of cancer worldwide in the united states there were an estimated 16940 new cases of esophageal cancer in 2017 while in 2014 approximately 45547 people had this type of cancer according to lv drinking hot tea on a regular basis is linked to esophageal cancer in people who also smoke and drink alcohol habitually thus pointing to a complex favorable conjuncture for the development of this disease lv and colleagues conducted their research as part of the national natural science foundation of china and the national key research and development program the studys findings were published in the journal annals of internal medicine a fivefold increase in risk of cancer lv and team studied the link between drinking tea at very high temperatures and the development of esophageal cancer in the chinese population china is not only the number one consumer of tea but it is also a country with one of the highest incidences of this type of cancer according to the researchers chinese men in particular are most likely to be keen on not only hot tea but on cigarettes and alcohol as well the combination of tobacco alcohol compounds found in tea and the negative effects of drinks served at very high temperatures is likely to attack health eventually lv and colleagues suggest one injection could kill cancer are we drawing nearer to a cure for cancer read now the researchers monitored the health of participants in the china kadoorie biobank study whose aim is to collect data on the development of chronic diseases including heart diseases cancer and diabetes in china to ensure the consistency of their results the scientists excluded participants who had an existing diagnosis of cancer as well as those who had cut down on tea alcohol and cigarettes in the end they analyzed the data sourced from 456155 adult participants aged between 30 and 79 all these participants health developments were then followedup for a median period of 92 years during this period 1731 participants were diagnosed with esophageal cancer lv and team uncovered a positive correlation between drinking burninghot tea regular alcohol intake and smoking and a higher risk of esophageal cancer those who engaged in all three of these habits showed a fivefold increase in the risk for this type of cancer compared with their peers who did not drink tea at high temperatures drink alcohol or smoke cigarettes individuals who only drank hot tea and who did not drink alcohol or smoke did not have a higher risk of esophageal cancer either suggesting that the concerted effect of those three behaviors was a major risk factor based on the findings lv and colleagues advise people to choose their habits carefully and if they find it challenging to give up their daily drink or cigarette the researchers suggest that its best to avoid drinking tea at very high temperatures they conclude '' our findings suggest that abstaining from hot tea might be beneficial for preventing esophageal cancer in persons who drink alcohol excessively or smoke ''intermittent fasting such as eating only on alternate days might enhance the ability of aerobic exercise to increase endurance because the body switches to using fats and ketones as a source of fuel for muscles instead of carbohydrates research shows the effects of intermittent fasting on endurance this was the conclusion that researchers came to after studying the effect in mice with such a regimen for a limited period of time their study is to be published in the faseb journal the findings suggest that three meals per day and snacking may not be the only eating habit for people who engage in endurance sports to reach peak performance and maintain good health '' emerging evidence '' explains senior study author dr mark mattson from the laboratory of neurosciences in the national institute on aging in baltimore md `` suggests that intermittent dietary energy restriction might improve overall health and reduce risk factors for diabetes and cardiovascular disease in humans '' he and his team say that their findings propose that a similar pattern of eating and fasting may boost the beneficial effect of moderate aerobic exercise on endurance and that it should be studied further food deprivation exercise and endurance for the study the team put mice into four groups and observed them for 2 months as they went through the following exercise and eating patterns the control ctrl mice did not exercise at all and could eat as much food as they wanted every day like the ctrl mice the exercise ex mice could eat as much daily food as they wanted but they also ran on a treadmill for 45 minutes each day the `` alternate day food deprivation '' adf mice were only fed a fixed amount on every other day and did not exercise at all the exadf mice were restricted to the adf eating pattern but also exercised every day on a treadmill for 45 minutes how intermittent fasting can increase weight loss learn how researchers explored the chemical pathways that might be involved in intermittent fasting without restricting overall calorie intake read now as expected the results showed that the mice that exercised daily the ex and exadf groups performed better in endurance tests than the two groups that did not exercise at all ctrl and adf however the adf mice that exercised daily the exadf group had better endurance that is they could run farther and last longer than the daily exercise mice that were allowed to eat what they wanted the ex group the researchers also found that the mice on adf were able to maintain their body weight and had better glucose tolerance `` regardless of whether they exercised or not '' they note that following glucose metabolism although the ex groups glucose levels recovered at a faster rate than the ctrl groups the glucose levels of the adf and exadf groups recovered even faster shifted fuel preference the results showed that the effect of adf was to `` shift fuel preference '' in muscles toward fatty acids and away from carbohydrates and it also `` enhanced endurance '' in the adf mice that exercised exadf the researchers also found that the enhanced endurance performance did not come from changes to volume of oxygen usage or vo2max a way of measuring the amount of energy used during exercise as the rise in this measure was the same in both exercise groups ex and exadf instead the increased endurance in the exercising adf mice exadf group compared with the unrestricted eating exercising mice ex group came from a reduction in their respiratory exchange ratio or the ratio of co2 produced to o2 consumed this note the authors suggests that adf caused the fuel source to switch from carbohydrates to fats the scientists also observed that adf affects the liver differently to exercise for example adf alters gene expression that regulates `` lipid metabolism and cell growth '' whereas exercise changes gene expression that alters `` calcium signaling and stress adaptation '' the findings support the idea that evolutionary pressure has caused the body to optimize and perform extremely well when food is scarce dr thoru pederson editorinchief of the faseb journal comments on this '' this study reminds us of the nexus between our own huntergatherer metabolism still operative and modern habits with the findings from this animal system likely transferable to us to a considerable degree '' dr thoru pedersonsome cancers put up a fight against regular treatments such as chemotherapy or radiotherapy due to their various `` strategies '' for survival but by manipulating cellular processes scientists have now found a way of bypassing one of cancers selfpreservation mechanisms recent research reveals how we may be able to bypass one of cancers survival strategies and trigger tumor cell death autophagy a term meaning `` selfdevouring '' in greek is normally cells way of staying orderly and functional this is due to the fact that when autophagy is triggered cells break down the elements that arent useful any longer and `` recycle '' material for reuse this process has been shown to have complex implications for cancer cells sometimes it helps to destroy them but at other times it helps them to thrive one way in which cancer cells use autophagy `` in their own interest '' is to evade apoptosis or cell death apoptosis and autophagy both rely on similar mechanisms to break down cellular material that is no longer helpful but while apoptosis takes this disassembly all the way eventually causing the cell to die in autophagy death is postponed by recycling some of the cellular material in many cases researchers have discovered that chemotherapy and radiotherapy can increase the presence of autophagy in cancer cells which actually allows them to enter a `` hiatus '' mode that helps them to evade cell death and resume their activity later while researchers have studied the importance of autophagy inhibitors in promoting apoptosis the underlying mechanisms that allow cell death to occur when this recycling process is inhibited have remained unclear now researchers from the university of colorado cancer center in aurora have begun to uncover some of these mechanisms which has also allowed them to develop a fresh strategy to bypass tumor cells autophagy and trigger their death more efficiently the results of the study which was led by andrew thorburn have now been published in the journal developmental cell autophagy as suspended animation in the new study the researchers explain that the sofar mysterious link between autophagy and apoptosis is transcription factor foxo3a which is a protein that carries with it `` instructions '' as to what should take place at cellular level '' the problem '' says thorburn `` is this many anticancer treatments push cancer cells to the brink of death but the cells use autophagy to go into a kind of suspended animation pausing but not dying '' '' we dont want cancer cells to pause we want them to die we show that foxo3a may make the difference between these two outcomes '' andrew thorburn it turns out that foxo3a plays a key role in the cellular homeostasis related to autophagy that is it helps to regulate that process interestingly though autophagy also helps to regulate the levels of this transcription factor in other words when the presence of autophagy is increased foxo3a levels go down and when autophagy is downregulated more foxo3a is produced thereby boosting the cellular recycling process this means that autophagy remains at constant levels sometimes despite the action of chemotherapy drugs the state of cancer are we close to a cure where is cancer research in its quest for a cure read now previous research carried out at thorburns laboratory revealed that another protein known as puma is key in `` telling '' cells when to selfdestruct now thorburn and team have also found that foxo3a can increase the expression of the gene that drives the production of puma long story short when autophagy is inhibited more foxo3a is produced and when that happens the heightened levels of foxo3a help boost the presence of autophagy in cancer cells again but at the same time the transcription factor increases the presence of puma which drives cell death mechanism suggests combination therapy following these discoveries the scientists were interested in seeing whether they could use these mechanisms to render cancer cells more vulnerable to apoptosis their strategy involved using autophagy inhibitors alongside a tumor suppressing drug called nutlin while the drug is known to stunt the growth of cancer cells it had not been tied to triggering cell death so the researchers wanted to learn whether by pairing it up with autophagy inhibitors apoptosis would be prompted more efficiently the reason why thorburn and colleagues decided to test both therapies in concert is because both autophagy inhibition and nutlin are known to increase the production of puma though they do so through independent channels foxo3a and a transcription factor known as p53 respectively '' what we wanted to see '' says first author brent fitzwalter `` is whether these two things together nutlin along with autophagy inhibition would increase puma past the point of growth inhibition and into actual cell death '' after analyzing a series of tests conducted on cell cultures and mouse models of cancer tumors the researchers were delighted to see that this strategy did work the way they hoped it would '' the result was that we turned a drug that could slow down tumor growth but couldnt kill cancer cells into one that now kills the cells '' andrew thorburn these findings the researchers add could provide the groundwork for future clinical trials putting this combination treatment to the test to confirm its effectcoffee is a complex substance and as a new study finds its metabolic interactions are equally complex surprisingly coffee influences the same regions of the brain as cannabis a new study finds an intriguing relationship between cannabis and coffee although studies looking at coffees health benefits or lack thereof appear to be published on an almost daily basis its true impact on health is still poorly understood some studies have found health benefits some have concluded that it might reduce mortality risk and others drew no solid conclusions this confusion is due to several factors and one is the difficulty in separating cause and effect in large populationbased studies for example someone who drinks a lot of coffee might also sleep less smoke more tobacco drink less water or work unsociable hours these factors muddy the statistical waters also coffee is an incredibly complex beast it contains more than 1000 aroma compounds levels of which vary depending on the type of coffee bean and how it is brewed the metabolites of coffee recently a group of researchers from northwestern university in chicago il took a detailed look at the impact of coffee consumption on our internal chemistry their findings were published this week in the journal of internal medicine the 3month study involved 47 people living in finland in the first month the participants drank no coffee at all in the second they consumed four cups every day and in the third they drank eight cups each day cannabis intoxication may be stopped with antiobesity drug researchers may have found an antidote to cannabinoid intoxication read now using advanced profiling techniques lead author marilyn cornelis and her team checked the levels of more than 800 metabolites in the blood after each stage metabolites are chemicals produced during metabolism they are generally small molecules and carry out a range of functions both within and between cells the scientists found that with increased coffee consumption blood metabolites involved in the endocannabinoid system dropped off this is the system that gives cannabis its recreational and medical effects interestingly the effect of coffee consumption on the endocannabinoid system was the opposite to cannabis use endocannabinoid neurotransmitters decreased with the consumption of eight cups per day but levels are increased by cannabis use endocannabinoids may answer queries the endocannabinoid system helps to modulate a whole host of metabolic activities including blood pressure cognition addiction immunity appetite sleep and glucose metabolism so if coffee influences this overarching system it will open up many new research avenues '' these are entirely new pathways by which coffee might affect health '' notes cornelis `` now we want to delve deeper and study how these changes affect the body '' for instance the endocannabinoid system is believed to influence eating behavior as cornelis says this could help to explain `` the link between cannabis use and the munchies '' conversely coffee has been considered a potential weight loss aid and may reduce type 2 diabetes risk '' this is often thought to be due to caffeines ability to boost fat metabolism or the glucoseregulating effects of polyphenols plantderived chemicals '' marilyn cornelis '' our new findings linking coffee to endocannabinoids '' she adds `` offer alternative explanations worthy of further study '' drinking more coffee was also found to increase metabolites from the androsteroid system this infers that coffee speeds up the excretion of steroids and because steroids are involved in a number of conditions notably cancers coffee could potentially play a part here too this study was the first to have demonstrated such a depth of metabolic interaction between coffee and the endocannabinoid system no doubt these new learnings will form the foundations of future research into a range of conditions however more work will be needed to understand whether the observed changes in metabolites were due to caffeine or one of the myriad other compounds in those cups of delicious black goldone of the hallmarks of advanced prostate cancer is a faulty pten tumor suppressor gene now after screening compounds for their effect on cells lacking pten scientists have discovered that a natural insecticide called deguelin can kill such cells by disrupting their energy supply researchers reveal how a natural insecticide can destroy advanced prostate cancer cells deguelin belongs to a class of drugs known as mitochondrial inhibitors the drugs block the action of mitochondria mitochondria are the tiny compartments inside cells that convert glucose in the cell into molecules of adenosine triphosphate atp which serve as units of energy for fueling the various workings of the cell scientists at cold spring harbor laboratory in new york found that treating cells lacking pten with some types of mitochondrial inhibitor caused the cells to use glucose from their environment to make atp and then transport it into their mitochondria to preserve them it is as though cells without pten explains study leader lloyd trotman a professor at cold spring harbor laboratory are driven to `` consume vast quantities of glucose '' to help their mitochondria survive they do this to the point where they run out of fuel and die the researchers describe their work which included the use of a genetic mouse model of metastatic prostate cancer that was developed by prof trotmans group in a paper now published in the journal cell reports they suggest that their findings show that at the right dose certain mitochondrial inhibitors such as deguelin and another that they identified called rotenone may be able to kill prostate cancer cells without harming healthy cells however they also note that the timing and conditions have to be just right – for example the drug would not work if glucose levels are high '' the hope is '' prof trotman explains `` that carefully timed administration of these drugs can generate a much better window of selective killing '' prostate cancer and tumor suppressors after skin cancer prostate cancer is the most common cancer in men in the united states where in 2017 an estimated 161360 people discovered that they had the disease in the vast majority of cases prostate cancer is diagnosed before the disease has started to spread while the cancer is in this localized state it is much easier to treat and the 5year survival rate is close to 100 percent however once the cancer has become metastatic that is it has spread and set up new tumors in other parts of the body it is much harder to treat for men diagnosed with metastatic or advanced prostate cancer the average 5year survival rate is 29 percent in their study paper the authors note that a `` hallmark of advanced prostate cancer '' is that two tumor suppressor genes pten and p53 do not work properly because they are mutated when tumor suppressor genes work properly they `` slow down cell division '' repair broken dna and trigger programmed cell death faulty tumor suppressor genes on the other hand fail to carry out these functions and give rise to faulty cells that can grow uncontrollably and cause cancer deguelin stopped cancer progression prof trotman and colleagues suggest that of the 3 million men in the us who have prostate cancer `` roughly 100000 carry cancers with comutation of pten and p53 '' this `` prompted '' them to look for drugs that might work specifically against prostate cancers that carry mutated pten and p53 however because `` several studies '' have shown that loss only of p53 does not give rise to prostate cancer they decided to focus on pten shapeshifting cancer cells promote metastasis learn how loss of certain proteins makes prostate cancer cells able to change shape migrate and invade other tissues read now the researchers began the study by running a series of experiments using cells with and without pten they found that deguelin had the capacity to kill both types of cell but the dose required to kill cells with pten the normal cell model was 500 times higher than the dose required to kill cells without pten the cancer cell model they also discovered that the drug had a much stronger effect on the cells without pten because their mitochondria were consuming atp `` instead of producing it '' '' thats the exact opposite '' prof trotman says `` of what mitochondria are supposed to be doing mitochondria are supposed to generate atp for the rest of the cell '' finally when they then tested deguelin in their mouse model of `` lethal '' metastatic prostate cancer the researchers found that it stopped the cancer progressing drug requires low glucose levels the researchers suggest that the `` vulnerability '' that their findings have identified in ptendeficient cells may pave the way for `` highly selective targeting of incurable '' prostate cancer using mitochondrial inhibitors metformin the widely prescribed diabetes drug is also a mitochondrial inhibitor and is already being tested in clinical trials as an anticancer treatment the authors note that in the case of prostate cancer treatment with metformin seems to reduce disease deaths but not incidence '' this suggests '' they add `` that metformin may preferentially target aggressive prostate cancer '' and there are currently trials trying to find this out they propose that their new findings `` contribute to these efforts '' however they note that their study also suggests that one of the conditions necessary for mitochondrial inhibitors to have `` maximal selective killing '' power is `` depletion of tumor cell glucose supplies '' this would indicate the need for a treatment scenario that is opposite to that of diabetes in which metformin is taken just after a meal when blood glucose levels are high the authors conclude '' our results instead suggest that greater selectivity might be achieved if drugs are given when blood glucose levels are low ''finding a link between osteoarthritis and the bacteria in our guts seems unlikely however new research concludes that they could in fact be bedfellows a new study probes gut bacteria and their role in osteoarthritis obesity comes with a raft of related health risks including diabetes and cardiovascular disease it is also intimately tied to osteoarthritis often referred to as the `` wear and tear '' arthritis osteoarthritis involves the slow degradation of cartilage or the padding between bones in a joint in the united states osteoarthritis affects an estimated 31 million people and is a leading cause of disability globally as it stands osteoarthritis can not be cured people who carry excess weight put extra strain on their joints this it was thought explained the increased risk of osteoarthritis that comes with obesity a new study published this week in the journal jci insight looked at a more intriguing mechanism that might link these two conditions gut bacteria we have billions of bacteria living in our intestines they are vital for good health and over recent years just how vital they are has become increasingly clear researchers from the university of rochester medical center in new york set out to explore what links there might be between diet obesity gut bacteria and osteoarthritis googleadslotinfopush { '' slotname '' mnt_dlb1 '' slotcontainer '' mnt_dlb1_container } fattening up mice to begin with the researchers fed mice a highfat diet over a 12week period they quickly became diabetic and obese doubling their percentage of body fat next the bacterial residents of the animals colons were assessed as expected their microbiomes were offkilter their bowels were overrun with proinflammatory bacteria and had a distinct lack of healthy probiotic bacteria such as bifidobacteria osteoarthritis could researchers have found the key to prevention a new study may have revealed a new prevention and treatment strategy for osteoarthritis read now at the same time the scientists observed bodywide inflammation in the obese mice including the knee joints to induce osteoarthritis the researchers tore the animals menisci or the cushion of cartilage between the shin and thigh bones this type of injury commonly causes osteoarthritis in the obese mice osteoarthritis developed much more quickly than in the control mice in fact within 12 weeks virtually all of the obese mices cartilage had gone '' cartilage '' says michael zuscik phd an associate professor of orthopaedics in the center for musculoskeletal research `` is both a cushion and lubricant supporting frictionfree joint movements '' when you lose that '' he says `` its bone on bone rock on rock its the end of the line and you have to replace the whole joint preventing that from happening is what we as osteoarthritis researchers strive to do to keep that cartilage '' googleadslotinfopush { '' slotname '' mnt_dlb2 '' slotcontainer '' mnt_dlb2_container } can cartilage degradation be slowed for the next phase of the study the scientists started the protocol again they fattened up mice with a 12week highfat diet but this time they included a prebiotic called oligofructose prebiotics not to be confused with probiotics can not be broken down by mouse or human guts however many beneficial bacteria such as bifidobacteria thrive in their presence this subtle but important change in diet promoted the growth of healthy bacteria and produced a marked reduction in proinflammatory bacteria importantly it also reduced inflammation in the joints and the knee cartilage of the obese mice was indistinguishable from that of the nonobese control mice the addition of a prebiotic to the diet also reduced diabetic symptoms but it made no difference to the amount of weight that the mice gained so even though the joints were subjected to the same amount of strain they were healthier this supports the theory that inflammation rather than mechanical strain is the key driver of osteoarthritis '' that reinforces the idea that osteoarthritis is another secondary complication of obesity just like diabetes heart disease and stroke which all have inflammation as part of their cause '' robert mooney phd a professor of pathology and laboratory medicine '' perhaps '' adds prof mooney `` they all share a similar root and the microbiome might be that common root '' googleadslotinfopush { '' slotname '' mnt_dlb3 '' slotcontainer '' mnt_dlb3_container } a note of caution it is vital to remind ourselves that though the findings are exciting there are significant differences between the mouse microbiome and our own the next step therefore will be to move this line of investigation into humans the leaders of this study plan to team up with the military and veteran microbiome consortium for research and education at the us department of veterans affairs in denver co they hope to compare the microbiomes of veterans with and without obesityrelated osteoarthritis they will supplement some of these participants with prebiotics to gauge how much benefit this intervention might have in humansnew research suggests that intermittent fasting may raise insulin levels damage pancreatic cells and increase the amount of abdominal fat intermittent fasting may be a popular diet but it may also harm our metabolic health suggests a new study the socalled intermittent fasting diet has been gaining more and more traction among people who want to lose weight quickly this popular diet consists of `` fast '' days where one drastically restricts their calorie intake to a quarter of the daily dose or less for instance and `` feast '' days where the person dieting can eat whatever they please sometimes referred to as a dieting `` fad '' intermittent fasting has become popular in recent years due to its suggested benefits of increasing lifespan and staving off cancer indeed some animal studies have indicated that intermittent fasting may lower the risk of cancer while observational studies have shown that people whose religion has them fasting regularly live longer than seniors who do not fast but could there also be downsides to intermittent fasting research presented at the european society of endocrinology annual meeting which took place in barcelona spain suggests that the dieting practice may have serious consequences for a persons metabolism specifically the new study led by ana cláudia munhoz bonassa a researcher at the university of são paulo in brazil suggests that intermittent fasting may impair the normal activity of the pancreas and the production of insulin which may in turn raise the risk of type 2 diabetes intermittent fasting may lead to diabetes the researchers were prompted in their endeavor by older studies suggesting that fasting for a short period of time increases oxidative stress and the production of free radicals oxidative stress and excessive levels of free radicals have been suggested to speed up the aging process and to damage our dna raising the risk of cancer cardiovascular disease and neurodegeneration to find out whether intermittent fasting does indeed generate free radicals bonassa and her colleagues placed healthy adult rats on the diet for a period of 3 months going vegan could prevent type 2 diabetes the plantbased diet may keep diabetes at bay suggests a new study read now during this time the researchers measured and monitored the rodents insulin levels and function their body weight and their free radical levels at the end of the dieting period the rats had lost weight as expected however the distribution of their body fat changed unexpectedly the amount of fat tissue in the rodents abdomen increased belly fat has been shown by recent studies to be deeply linked with type 2 diabetes with some research even suggesting a molecular mechanism through which the former may lead to the latter additionally bonassa and colleagues found damage in the insulinsecreting pancreatic cells as well as higher levels of free radicals and signs of insulin resistance the studys lead author comments on the findings saying `` we should consider that overweight or obese people who opt for intermittent fasting diets may already have insulin resistance '' '' so '' bonassa continues `` although this diet may lead to early rapid weight loss in the longterm there could be potentially serious damaging effects to their health such as the development of type 2 diabetes '' '' this is the first study to show that despite weight loss intermittent fasting diets may actually damage the pancreas and affect insulin function in normal healthy individuals which could lead to diabetes and serious health issues '' ana cláudia munhoz bonassa in future the scientists plan to study in more detail the damaging effects of intermittent fasting on the normal functioning of the pancreas and the insulin hormonewhile viruses are best known for causing disease and suffering scientists have recently designed a way to use them as a force for good in the fight against cancer viruses an example of which is shown here have a bad name but can they be used therapeuticallyimage credit graham beards viruses are small rapidly replicating infectious agents that can only survive within the cells of other organisms they can be found in every ecosystem on earth and can infect all lifeforms capable of causing thousands of conditions from the common cold to the crimeancongo hemorrhagic fever viruses are as successful as they are deadly using their spectacularly successful traits scientists from cardiff university in the united kingdom are currently investigating ways to turn viruses against cancer the researchers have successfully `` trained '' viruses to recognize ovarian cancer and kill it without harming any healthy tissue retraining viruses the new study builds on similar research from recent years colead author dr alan parker notes '' reprogrammed viruses are already being used in gene therapy procedures to treat a range of diseases demonstrating they can be trained from being lifethreatening into potentially lifesaving agents '' cancer virus fuels immune system to attack brain tumors this study uses viruses to target aggressive brain tumors by injecting them into the bloodstream read now but in the past it was not possible to make the viruses selective enough such a lack of selectivity meant that they would also invade healthy cells and cause them damage in their new paper which is now published in the journal clinical cancer research the researchers outline a new approach that avoids this problem as dr parker explains `` weve taken a common wellstudied virus and completely redesigned it so that it can no longer attach to noncancerous cells but instead seeks out a specific marker protein called alphavbeta6 αvβ6 integrin which is unique to certain cancer cells allowing it to invade them '' evil turned good once a virus has entered a cell it hijacks the cellular machinery to make thousands of copies of itself then the cell ruptures and the new viruses are free to infect neighboring cells in the retrained viruses the same occurs but only cancer cells are invaded and ruptured the viruss ability to replicate so quickly makes them a formidable pathogen but once they have been repurposed their rapid multiplication becomes a therapeutic benefit as an added bonus the virus triggers an immune response and helps the immune system to recognize target and destroy the cancerous cells '' in this case we introduced the reprogrammed virus to ovarian cancer which it successfully identified and destroyed this is an exciting advance offering real potential for patients with a variety of cancers '' dr alan parker in the future the researchers hope to tweak their viral weapon further they want to train the virus to recognize a protein component that is shared by ovarian breast pancreatic lung and oral cancers also farther down the line the scientists hope to make the virus even more powerful they believe that by tinkering with its dna they might be able to program it to produce and release antibodies or other anticancer compounds while it is housed within the cell these initial studies were carried out on a mouse model of ovarian cancer but within the next 5 years they hope that the reprogrammed viruses will reach the clinical trials stagetoo many carbohydrates or too much fat opinions as to which parts of our diets are likely to cause obesity are split a recent study takes a closer look at the effects of diet on weight and health does a diet that is too rich in fats or too rich in carbs lead to obesity earlier this year medical news today reported on a study that pitted the potential benefits of the lowcarb diet against those of the lowfat one the scientists asked which type of diet would be best for shedding excess weight their conclusion in essence that it is hard to tell both have pros and cons some people may benefit more from laying off the fats whereas others may see better results by sticking to a lowcarb dietary plan both carbs which are a primary source of glucose or simple sugar and fats have been blamed for increasing a persons likelihood of facing obesity and studies keep debating these points so the argument is far from settled recently the view that an excessive carb intake may be the main dietary cause of obesity has had more traction though some researchers have questioned this in a paper now published in the journal cell metabolism researchers from two institutions the institute of genetics and developmental biology at the chinese academy of sciences in beijing and the university of aberdeen in the united kingdom have once more turned the cards suggesting that we should look once more to fatty foods sugar intake had no impact on weight in what they think is the largest study of its kind to date lead researcher prof john speakman and team worked with mice to test the effects of three macronutrients – carbohydrates fats and protein on body fat accumulation the scientists turned to the murine model because as they explain asking human participants to follow one type of diet and evaluating them for very long periods of time is extremely tricky a savory starter could help you to make better food choices learn how umami or savory foods could lead you to making more healthful choices in your diet read now but looking at rodents which have similar metabolic mechanisms could offer crucial clues and workable evidence mice belonging to five different genetically engineered strains were assigned to one of 30 various types of diet including variations on their content of fat carbs and protein the mice were kept on their respective diets for a period of 3 months which counts as 9 years would for humans throughout this time they were assessed for changes in body weight and body fat content to see which of the mice would end up becoming overweight the scientists found that only an excessive intake of fats increased adiposity body fat content in mice while carbohydrates including up to 30 percent of calories derived from sucrose had no impact moreover a combined fatty and sugary diet did not increase body fat more than a fatty diet did on its own as for protein intake the research team says that there was no evidence that it affected the intake of other macronutrients or the amount of body fat and why does the intake of fat lead to obesity the researchers believe that fats `` appeal '' to the brains reward system stimulating a craving for an excessive amount of calories which then determines weight gain '' a clear limitation of this study '' as prof speakman explains `` is that it is based on mice rather than humans '' '' however mice have lots of similarities to humans in their physiology and metabolism and we are never going to do studies where the diets of humans are controlled in the same way for such long periods '' '' so the evidence it provides is a good clue to what the effects of different diets are likely to be in humans '' prof john speakmana study led by researchers in north carolina reveals that over the course of a 16week program lifestyle changes had the biggest impact on high blood pressure a new study demonstrates that lifestyle changes can be as effective as medication importantly those in the study had a reduced need for hypertension medication after the 16 weeks the study was presented at the american heart associations joint hypertension 2018 scientific sessions which outlines new hypertension research each year in all the study involved 129 men and women who were either overweight or obese they were all aged 40–80 and all participants had elevated blood pressures none of the participants were taking blood pressure medication at the time of the study but about half met the criteria for hypertension drugs diet exercise and hypertension each participant was randomly assigned one type of intervention one group changed its diet to the dash diet participated in counseling and underwent supervised exercise three times per week another group only changed its diet again the dash diet was used another group changed nothing the dash diet is an eating plan specifically designed to improve heart health it includes eating vegetables fruits whole grains lowfat or fatfree dairy products fish poultry beans and nuts adherents limit foods high in saturated fats such as fatty meats fullfat dairy and tropical oils including coconut palm kernel and palm new triple pill could eliminate high blood pressure a new combination drug looks set to revolutionize blood pressure treatment worldwide read now those in the first group had the most success overall in lowering their blood pressure they lost an average of 19 pounds over 16 weeks and reduced their blood pressure readings by an average of 16 millimeters of mercury mm hg systolic and 10 mm hg diastolic by contrast those eating a dash diet showed a blood pressure decrease of 11 mm hg systolic and 8 mm hg diastolic while those who did not modify their behavior averaged a blood pressure reading decline of 3 mm hg systolic and 4 mm hg diastolic at baseline 50 percent of the participants met the criteria to receive hypertensive medication however by the end of the study only 23 percent of those who changed their diet still met criteria as well as just 15 percent of those who changed both diet and exercise routine '' lifestyle modifications including healthier eating and regular exercise can greatly decrease the number of patients who need blood pressurelowering medicine '' states study author dr alan hinderliter an associate professor of medicine at university of north carolina in chapel hill the health impact of hypertension high blood pressure is common the american heart association aha estimate that hypertension affects almost half of adults living in the us and that many of those affected dont know that they have a blood pressure problem this is why high blood pressure is known as a `` silent killer '' there are very few if any symptoms hypertension if left untreated and unchecked can lead to serious health problems untreated high blood pressure can contribute to heart attacks strokes heart failure kidney disease vision loss sexual dysfunction angina and peripheral artery disease it can also damage your blood vessels and prompt lowdensity lipoprotein the `` bad '' cholesterol to build up in fissures along artery walls making the circulatory system work harder while being less efficient while this study showed that lifestyle modifications including diet and exercise might be able help decrease the need for blood pressure medications hinderliter notes that there should be further research before recommendations can be made also individuals with elevated blood pressure should always follow doctors orders and if already taking those medications continue for as long as its recommended still altering diet and adding exercise to a weekly routine is one measure the aha recommend for those who experience hypertension it can have a considerable impact on overall healthresearchers have found a way to deplete breast cancer cells of energy and thus halt their growth the findings may one day help to alleviate treatmentresistant breast cancer cancer cells shown here need to produce energy in their nucleus in order to spread but new research found a way to prevent them from doing so according to the american cancer society acs around 2 in 3 cancers are hormonedriven this means that the breast cancer cells possess proteins that act as hormone receptors and feed off of estrogen or progesterone these hormones help the breast cancer to spread so hormone therapy aims to prevent cancer from spreading or recurring by blocking the hormone receptors however these hormoneblocking drugs often have a wide array of side effects or are not fully effective because the cancer finds new ways to spread or becomes resistant to treatment but now new research carried out by scientists from the karolinska institutet and science for life laboratory in solna sweden offers new hope as the team discovered a way to starve hormonefueled breast cancer cells of energy this may lead to better drugs in the future the researchers led by prof thomas helleday of the department of medical biochemistry and biophysics in the karolinska institutet found a protein that helps breast cancer cells to get the energy they need to proliferate they also found a compound that inhibits this protein brent dg page and nicholas ck valerie of the science for life laboratory at karolinska are the first authors of the new study which was published in the journal nature communications starving breast cancer cells of energy prof helleday and his colleagues originally set out to investigate the role of the socalled nudt5 protein a nucleotidemetabolizing enzyme in breast cancer they discovered that nudt5 is used by breast cancer cells to create energy in their nucleus the nuclear energy thus created is used to drive cancercausing gene expression so the researchers shifted their focus to developing a molecule that could block nudt5s activity this compound is called th5427 and laboratory experiments revealed that it successfully acts as an nudt5 inhibitor stopping the spread of breast cancer cells what to know about breast cancer and back pain what are the links between back pain and breast cancer read now the authors summarize their findings saying `` utilizing these stateoftheart techniques led us to discover th5427 a potent and cellactive nudt5 inhibitor that can be used to further understand the role of nudt5 in biological systems '' '' we have provided a proof of concept showing that th5427 blocks nudt5dependent processes in breast cancer cells and targeting nudt5 may represent a promising new therapeutic approach for breast cancer treatment '' explain the researchers beyond this `` proof of concept '' the scientists now hope to discover and develop more nudt5 inhibitors which in the long run could help to drastically improve the lives of breast cancer patients they say '' ongoing efforts are aimed at formulating nudt5 inhibitors for in vivo use and will focus on further investigating the role of nudt5 in cancer and other disease models '' ultimately prof helleday and his colleagues hope to be moving toward human clinical trials but the studys senior author emphasizes the long road ahead '' theyre exciting findings but the path ahead is long since we still know very little about how nudt5 operates '' he says the researchers hope that their findings will help to treat not only breast cancer but hopefully other forms of cancer as wellnot a lover of indian food a new study might change your mind researchers have found that a compound in turmeric the spice that gives curry its golden color could help to improve the mood and memory of older adults a twicedaily dose of curcumin found in turmeric has been found to improve memory and mood in older adults turmeric has been linked to a wealth of health benefits last year for example medical news today reported on a study suggesting that turmeric could help to treat pancreatic cancer while other research claims the popular spice may help to treat stroke and alzheimers disease it is turmerics abundance of a compound called curcumin that makes it so special studies have shown that curcumin is an antioxidant meaning that it can protect our cells against damage caused by free radicals it also has strong antiinflammatory properties the new study recently published in the american journal of geriatric psychiatry provides further evidence that curcumin can protect the brain first study author dr gary small of the longevity center at the university of california los angeles and colleagues tested the compound on 40 adults aged between 51 and 84 all of whom had mild memory problems for a total of 18 months the participants were randomized to one of two groups one group took 90 milligrams of curcumin twice daily while the other group took a placebo the curcumin used in this study was a bioavailable form called theracurmin which the researchers describe as a `` form of curcumin with increased intestinal endothelium penetrability '' curcumin may have cognitive benefits at study baseline all participants underwent standard cognitive tests and these were repeated every 6 months throughout the study as well as at the end of the study additionally 30 of the subjects 15 of whom who were receiving curcumin had positron emission tomography pet scans of their brain at the beginning and end of the study is turmeric good for your skin learn whether turmeric may benefit skin health read now these scans were conducted in order to assess levels of the betaamyloid and tau which are proteins that are considered a hallmark of alzheimers disease research has suggested that an increase in levels of betaamyloid and tau can occur up to 15 years before symptoms of alzheimers arise suggesting that the proteins may be an early indicator of the disease results revealed that the subjects who took curcumin twice daily demonstrated a 28 percent improvement in memory tests over the course of the study while those who took the placebo showed no significant memory improvements subjects who received curcumin also experienced slight improvements in mood unlike those who took the placebo what is more participants who took curcumin also had lower levels of betaamyloid and tau in the hypothalamus and amygdala brain regions which are regions that play key roles in memory and emotion '' these results suggest that taking this relatively safe form of curcumin could provide meaningful cognitive benefits over the years '' dr gary small first author the side effects of curcumin were mild the team reports four people experienced abdominal pain and other gastrointestinal symptoms but so did two of the placebotreated participants one subject who received curcumin experienced `` a temporary feeling of heat and pressure in the chest '' according to dr small and colleagues a followup study is in the pipeline it will involve a larger number of participants including people with mild depression and individuals with a genetic risk for alzheimers disease the aim of the research will be to determine whether certain factors such as age the severity of cognitive problems and the presence of alzheimersrelated genes might influence the effects of curcumin on mood and memoryrecent research published in the journal frontiers in physiology examines the effect of electronic cigarette vapors on two types of white blood cell the findings suggest that the compounds that give ecigarettes their flavor are toxic with some flavors being worse than others nicotinefree liquids in ecigarettes may be quite toxic according to new research despite the fact that electronic cigarettes ecigarettes help some people to quit smoking conventional ones the devices contain many other nonnicotine chemicals the health effects of which are still being investigated here at medical news today weve been trying to keep you updated on all the latest scientific discoveries when it comes to unraveling the complex effects of using ecigarettes or `` vaping '' for example a couple of studies that we reported on suggested that ecigarettes may have adverse cardiovascular effects and that they may slow down heart rate that said some of these studies are either observational and thus unable to explain causality or performed in mice new research however takes things to the laboratory scientists at the university of rochester medical center in new york set out to test the hypothesis that vaping ecigarettes that do not contain nicotine would be less harmful than conventional cigarettes to this end the researchers who were led by senior author dr irfan rahman focused on `` the immunotoxicological and the oxidative stress effects by these ecigarette flavoring chemicals on two types of human monocytic cell lines '' oxidative stress is a process in which oxygen radicals are produced in excess resulting in a series of damaging effects including increased toxicity damage to our dna or even cancer monocytes are a type of white blood cell that play a critical role in our immune response to inflammation therefore the results of the new study are key for our understanding of the relationship between ecigarettes and our immune system cinnamon vanilla buttery flavors the worst to assess the flavorings potential for causing oxidative stress the team measured the production of socalled reactive oxygen species ros '' we hypothesized '' the authors write `` that the flavoring chemicals used in ejuiceseliquids induce an inflammatory response cellular toxicity and ros production '' as expected the cytotoxicity tests performed by first author dr thivanka muthumalage and colleagues revealed that treatment with these chemicals increased inflammation and tissue damage all of this was done by increasing the levels of oxidative stress also `` mixing a variety of flavors resulted in greater cytotoxicity and cellfree ros levels compared to the treatments with individual flavors suggesting that mixing of multiple flavors of eliquids are more harmful to the users '' the researchers add the pros and cons of ecigarettes revealed a metareview of existing studies examines the evidence available for the benefits and harms of ecigarettes read now the authors conclude by saying `` our data suggest that the flavorings used in ejuices can trigger an inflammatory response in monocytes mediated by ros production providing insights into potential pulmonary toxicity and tissue damage in ecigarette users '' '' cinnamon vanilla and butter flavoring chemicals were the most toxic but our research showed that mixing flavors of eliquids caused by far the most toxicity to white blood cells '' dr thivanka muthumalage dr rahman comments on the significance of these findings saying `` currently nicotinefree ecigarettes are not regulated and alluring flavor names such as candy cake cinnamon roll and mystery mix attract young vapers '' '' our scientific findings show that eliquid flavors can and should be regulated and that ejuice bottles must have a descriptive listing of all ingredients we urge regulatory agencies to act to protect public health '' he addswe undertake creative pursuits such as writing acting drawing or dancing simply because we enjoy them intuitively we know that creativity is good for us and our creative passions make us happy but what does science have to say about the benefits of creativity creative activities make us feel happier and theyre a great outlet for emotions but what are their other health benefits some pursue creative activities as a hobby and some do it for a living but no matter what road weve taken to unleash our imaginations and need for free selfexpression its pretty clear that making things is part and parcel of being human we have been creating since prehistoric times more than 39900 years ago our ancestors left some of their first marks the outlines of their hands and crude drawings of animals on the walls of caves we could go as far as to say that our need to create things is in our blood this has served us well over the course of time as we have learned to create tools and shelters cook food make medicines for various ailments and set bones sometimes however we have created things just for the sake of it it could be said as oscar wilde infamously proclaimed in the picture of dorian gray that `` all art is quite useless '' but is it really i sometimes wish i could tap mr wilde on the shoulder and ask him `` well if art is so useless why did you write so assiduously '' aside from any philosophical arguments that may be brought to the contrary a lot of research in the medical field has actually suggested that art and more specifically being creative is in fact quite useful for our mental and physical wellbeing below we look at some of the benefits that creative endeavors from writing to dancing can bring us and we encourage you to incorporate even more creativity into your own life improved mental health drawing painting or molding objects from clay has been scientifically proven to help people to deal with different kinds of trauma in a comprehensive article on the connection between art healing and public health heather l stuckey and jeremy nobel say that `` art helps people express experiences that are too difficult to put into words such as a diagnosis of cancer '' '' artistic selfexpression '' they continue `` might contribute to maintenance or reconstruction of a positive identity '' five hobbies that can improve your health can you stay healthy by doing more of what you like we look at some of the hobbies whose health benefits are confirmed by science read now a number of studies have also found that writing expressive writing in particular which requires participants to narrate an event and explain how it affected them can help people to overcome trauma and manage negative emotions in much the same way as visual expression this type of writing allows people to take negative situations that can not be changed and integrate them into their lifes story creating meaning for events that left indelible marks such as a medical diagnosis a loved ones death or a violent experience one qualitative study that interviewed male survivors of childhood abuse found that asking them to write about their traumatic experiences allowed them in conjunction with specialized trauma therapy to make sense of the trauma in deeply personal ways immediate impact vs longterm benefits immediately after writing down ones experiences the writer might feel an increase in negative emotions as they recall bad incidents however the longterm effects are positive say karen a baikie and kay wilhelm the authors of a review of studies that focused on expressive writing '' the immediate impact of expressive writing is usually a shortterm increase in distress negative mood and physical symptoms and a decrease in positive mood compared with controls '' they write adding '' however at longerterm followup many studies have continued to find evidence of health benefits in terms of objectively assessed outcomes selfreported physical health outcomes and selfreported emotional health outcomes '' expressive writing doesnt just help with trauma and negative emotions a 2001 study found that asking people to write about positive experiences and about `` the best self '' that they wanted to develop in the future was also associated with an increased sense of psychological wellbeing similar effects were noted in a later study that asked participants to write about `` intensely positive experiences '' brainboosting effects speaking of writing research has also shown that writing down things down can help with learning and memorization however if you take the shortcut and type the ideas that you want to remember that wont actually do you much good if you want to learn more efficiently researchers say that you have to go oldfashioned and put pen to paper putting pen to paper can help us to learn faster but writing isnt the only path to a better brain albert einstein reportedly said that music was so much a part of his life that if he hadnt been a physicist he would certainly have evolved into a musician well it does appear that making music can have a significant impact on how well different areas of our brains communicate with each other a review published in 2014 suggests that individuals with musical training such as those who learned how to play an instrument have improved connectivity between the two hemispheres of their brains another creative pursuit that improves our cognition is playacting a study from 2004 found that older individuals who were encouraged to participate in theater performances had improved psychological wellbeing after 4 weeks they also exhibited better cognitive functioning in particular the participants experienced better word and listening recall as well as improved problemsolving abilities physical health benefits '' studies have shown that individuals who have written about their own traumatic experiences exhibit statistically significant improvements in various measures of physical health reductions in visits to physicians and better immune system functioning '' write stuckey and nobel a randomized trial that involved people undergoing hiv treatment showed that expressive writing helped participants to boost their immune system while it is unclear why people who wrote about their experiences on a regular basis exhibited an increased cd4+ lymphocyte count both writing and listening to music have been linked to an improved immune system response cd4+ lymphocytes are key to the functioning of the immune system and they are one of the main targets of the immunodeficiency virus writing was also seen to help with chronic pain management people dealing with conditions that made them experience chronic pain had improved pain control plus a decline in pain severity after expressing angry feelings in written form over a period of 9 weeks music therapy has immune systemboosting effects as well music affects our brains in complex ways stimulating the limbic system and moderating our response to stressful stimuli according to stuckey and nobel listening to music `` may help to restore effective functioning in the immune system partly via the actions of the amygdala and hypothalamus '' these brain regions are implicated in mood regulation and hormonal processes as well as in the bodys inflammatory response dance and the body creativity can also be a very mobile endeavor and this mobility brings its own set of benefits for instance a study focusing on breast cancer survivors found that dancing helped to improve shoulder function in participants and that it had a positive impact on their body image moreover dancing can be a fun way of staying or becoming fit in 2014 a woman who lost 100 pounds just by sticking to her dance routine became a media sensation recent research has shown that zumba programs can improve blood pressure and triglyceride levels while previous studies linked aerobic dance with better weight management a korean study from 2007 that looked at hiphop alongside aerobic dancing found that participants not only experienced improved psychological moods but that they also reported lower levels of fatigue '' invention it must be humbly admitted '' wrote mary shelley in her introduction to frankenstein `` does not exist in creating out of void but out of chaos '' from 1818 when shelleys novel was first published to the present day and well before that and well beyond now creativity has been the ultimate means of reigning chaos in and drawing benefit out of it so if we can bring some order to our mental or physical states just by journaling smudging paint or learning to play the guitar why not take advantage of that and welcome more art into our lives we picked linked items based on the quality of products and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you we partner with some of the companies that sell these products which means healthline uk and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a links abovelovers of red wine rejoice researchers have now identified yet another reason why you should keep on enjoying this beverage red wine stains the teeth making your smile look like something out of a bmovie but a new study says that it might protect your oral health some of us love to savor a glass of red wine or two with dinner every once in a while the catch is that this velvety drink often leaves the teeth stained so maybe its not such a good idea to order it on your first date or while out on a business dinner that being the case its certainly not intuitive to infer that red wine could do anything for your oral health the contrary rather still this is precisely what a study conducted by researchers from spain suggests the research was led by m victoria morenoarribas and colleagues from instituto de investigación en ciencias de la alimentación in madrid and the department of health and genomics at the center for advanced research in public health in valencia morenoarribas and team have now published their findings in the journal of agricultural and food chemistry what happens in the mouth in the new study the scientists first compared the effect of two types of polyphenol typically found in red wine caffeic acid and pcoumaric acid as well as that of red wine and grape seed extracts provinols and vitaflavan on three harmful oral bacteria fusobacterium nucleatum streptococcus mutans and porphyromonas gingivalis what they found experimenting with a laboratory model of gum tissue was that the two red wine polyphenols caffeic acid and pcoumaric acid were most effective at repelling the harmful oral bacteria and preventing them from attaching to healthy tissue next they tested a mix of caffeic acid pcoumaric acid and streptococcus dentisani which is an oral probiotic that as recent research has suggested may help to prevent tooth decay this experiment was even more successful as the protective effect of the two polyphenols was enhanced by the presence of the probiotic finally the analysis of phenolic metabolites which are substances formed as the polyphenols start transforming in the mouth suggested that these small products may in fact be the `` active ingredient '' associated with the polyphenols protective effect so go ahead pour yourself a glass of red wine tonight safe in the thought that this drink at least wont cause you any oral suffering of course dont overdo it red wine is an alcoholic beverage after all and too much alcohol isnt anyones friend using a small wine glass though could help you curb your appetite a little so you can delight your palate and teeth and gums with some polyphenols while still keeping your gray matter quite safedepression has become a common mental health problem for some this condition lingers for many years and scientists now strive to understand how that might affect the brain and how treatments should be adjusted to address these changes when depression doesnt loosen its grip for a decade how does it impact the brain according to data from the centers for disease control and prevention cdc across the united states 81 percent of people over the age of 20 have depression over any given 2week period for some people depression might only be episodic and overcome within a matter of weeks or months however for others diagnosed with major depression the condition could persist for years affecting their lifestyle and quality of life looking at cases in which major depression lasts for over a decade researchers from the centre for addiction and mental health camh in ontario canada wanted to investigate whether living with this condition for so long would significantly impact the brain and if so how dr jeff meyer from the camh led a study focusing on that question he and his team compared the brain scans of people who had lived with untreated depression for 10 years or longer with those of people with a shorter history of depression the findings published last week in the lancet psychiatry suggest that specialists might want to change their approach to treating longterm depression as it progresses to match its increasing neurological impact depression may be progressive dr meyer and team worked with 80 people aged 18–75 of these 25 had lived with depression for longer than 10 years 25 had had the condition for less than a decade and 30 were depressionfree this final cohort made up the control group in a study from 2015 dr meyer and his colleagues saw that during episodes of major depression peoples brains would exhibit markers of inflammation understanding anhedonia what happens in the brain anhedonia or loss of pleasure in usually enjoyable activities is often associated with depression what are the underlying mechanisms read now based on that knowledge in the new study he wanted to explore whether the brain inflammation worsened over time in people with longlasting depression the scientists determined the severity of the neuroinflammation using a type of brain scan known as positron emission tomography pet this allowed them to monitor the activity of microglia a type of cell found in the central nervous system which are associated with the inflammatory response to injury active microglia produce translocator protein tspo which is a key marker of inflammation through the pet scans dr meyer and team found that the concentration of tspo was 29–33 percent higher in the brains of people who had lived with depression for more than a decade these inflammation markers were seen in three brain regions in particular the prefrontal cortex the anterior cingulate cortex and the insula consistent with previous findings the brains of those who had lived with untreated depression for shorter periods of time still had higher concentrations of tspo than the brains of healthy controls more focused studies required according to the researchers these results suggest that longterm depression should be treated as a different stage of the same condition as it may require a different therapeutic approach than depression in its earlier phases this they add is similar to the strategy applied in the case of neurodegenerative diseases which are also characterized by heightened brain inflammation '' greater inflammation in the brain is a common response with degenerative brain diseases as they progress such as with alzheimers disease and parkinsons disease '' notes dr meyer if depression although not a neurodegenerative disease is similar to such conditions that is characterized by an increasingly serious inflammatory response in the brain then it may be adequate to treat it with antiinflammatory drugs dr meyer suggests therefore he argues that further studies should look into the possibility of repurposing such medication as therapy for depression another question that should be answered he concludes is what the best therapy for people with longterm major depression might be since this specific population does not usually benefit from dedicated studiesresearchers provide further evidence that vitamin d may protect against cancer after finding that people from japan had a lower risk of the disease when they had higher levels of the `` sunshine vitamin '' researchers suggest that a higher vitamin d level could protect against cancer the results of the study which is one of the first to investigate the link between vitamin d levels and cancer risk in an asian population were recently published in the bmj the research was conducted by taiki yamaji of the center for public health sciences of the national cancer center in japan and her colleagues vitamin d is an essential vitamin for our bodies it not only helps to maintain calcium levels for good bone health it also plays significant roles in immune system functioning neuronal communication and muscle functioning the national institutes of health nih say that adults should aim to get around 600 international units of vitamin d every day the bodys main source of vitamin d is sunlight which is why it is often referred to as the `` sunshine vitamin '' we can also get vitamin d from certain foods including salmon tuna and cheese as well as from dietary supplements which are available to purchase online previous research has suggested that low vitamin d levels are a risk factor for certain cancer types and that increasing levels of the vitamin could help to protect against the disease however yamaji and colleagues point out that most research on vitamin d and cancer risk to date has focused on white populations '' given that vitamin d concentrations and metabolism vary substantially by raceethnicity '' note the researchers `` whether similar associations would also be observed in noncaucasian populations remains to be clarified '' with this in mind the researchers sought to determine how vitamin d levels influence the risk of cancer in japanese adults overall cancer risk reduced by a fifth the researchers analyzed the data of 33736 japanese people who were a part of the japan public health centerbased prospective study they were between the ages of 40 and 69 and they were followedup for an average of 16 years blood samples were taken from each participant at study baseline these were assessed for levels of 25hydroxyvitamin d which is the circulating form of vitamin d could vitamin d lower cardiovascular death risk researchers suggest that vitamin d could reduce the risk of death from cardiovascular disease read now the participants were divided into four groups based on their vitamin d levels ranging from the lowest to highest information was also gathered on the subjects medical history as well as on their dietary and lifestyle factors over the 16year followup period a total of 3301 new cancer cases were identified among the study participants compared with subjects who had the lowest vitamin d levels those with a higher level had a 20 percent lower risk of cancer overall the team reports this finding persisted after accounting for myriad possible confounding factors including age body mass index bmi levels of physical activity smoking status and alcohol intake on looking at specific cancers the researchers found that a higher vitamin d level was associated with a 30–50 percent lower risk of liver cancer with this reduced risk being more prominent in men higher vitamin d levels were not linked to a lower risk of lung cancer or prostate cancer the team reports and no association was found between higher vitamin d levels and an increase in cancer risk a possible ceiling effect yamaji and colleagues caution that their findings are solely observational so no conclusions can be made about the link between vitamin d and cancer risk furthermore the study has some important limitations for example they point out that there were only a small number of organspecific cancers included in their analysis additionally they note that it is possible that some cancer risk factors that were not accounted for in this study might have influenced the findings still the researchers say that their findings `` support the hypothesis that vitamin d has protective effects against cancers at many sites '' that being said the results indicate that there is a `` ceiling effect '' for vitamin d and cancer risk in other words there is an optimal level of vitamin d that protects us against cancer but going beyond this level offers no further benefit '' future studies are needed '' the researchers conclude `` to clarify the doseresponse pattern and the optimal vitamin d concentrations for cancer prevention '' we picked linked items based on the quality of products and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you we partner with some of the companies that sell these products which means healthline uk and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a links abovevitamin d which is often called the `` sunshine vitamin '' boasts a range of physiological roles a new study reveals that following a heart attack it might protect against consequent heart failure how might the sunshine vitamin benefit our heart health few foods contain vitamin d instead the vast majority is synthesized in our skin following exposure to the sun during a study of rickets in children vitamin d was initially identified as an important player in bone health we now know that vitamin d has an array of duties in the body beyond that of bone health for instance vitamin d is thought to impact the workings of muscles and blood vessels and even more recently evidence has been gathering that the vitamin might have a protective effect on heart health specifically studies have linked low levels of vitamin d to coronary artery disease and heart failure vitamin d and heart failure heart failure is a serious potentially lifethreatening condition wherein the heart is unable to pump sufficient blood and oxygen to nourish the tissues of the body in 2009 around 1 in 9 deaths in the united states `` included heart failure as contributing cause '' and because heart failure is so common understanding exactly what is involved physiologically is important due to the recent evidence that vitamin d might protect against heart failure scientists are keen to get a clearer understanding of the relationship vitamin d may protect against cancer researchers provide new evidence that vitamin d may protect against cancer read now although the benefits of vitamin d for heart health are becoming wellestablished the mechanisms at work are not understood recently a team of researchers from westmead institute for medical research in australia decided to take a closer look '' the benefits of vitamin d are becoming increasingly known but we still dont fully understand how mechanistically it can help with heart disease management we wanted to know more about how vitamin d protects the heart after a heart attack '' lead researcher prof james chong to dig into this problem the scientists used a mouse model and a form of vitamin d called 125dihydroxyvitamin d3 125d which `` interacts with hormones '' they wanted to understand how 125d affected an important set of heart cells the cells of interest to the team are known as cardiac colonyforming unit fibroblasts ccfufs and they are responsible for forming scar tissue following a heart attack getting an edge on heart failure a heart attack occurs when the supply of blood to the heart is stopped and because no oxygen is reaching sections of the tissue they become damaged which triggers inflammation in the region in the inflamed tissue ccfufs begin to replace damaged cells with `` collagenbased scar tissue '' as chong explains `` this is a problem because scarring of heart tissue can reduce the hearts ability to pump blood effectively which can lead to heart failure '' the team found that vitamin d was able to block the action of ccfufs thereby preventing the buildup of scar tissue and potentially stopping a blockage from developing their results are published this week in the journal heart lung and circulation on the importance of the results chong explains `` cardiovascular diseases including heart attacks and heart failure are the leading cause of death worldwide '' '' to change this we need to research heart conditions from every possible angle this study is the first to demonstrate the role of 125d in regulating cardiac progenitor cells and the findings are encouraging with further study vitamin d could prove to be an exciting lowcost addition to current treatments and we hope to progress these findings into clinical trials for humans '' so although research into vitamin d and its cardioprotective powers is in its infancy the results are encouraging finding any intervention that improves the chances of battling heart disease is good news and finding one that is readily available is an added bonus if you are interested in purchasing vitamin d supplements there is a huge range available online we picked linked items based on the quality of products and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you we partner with some of the companies that sell these products which means healthline uk and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a links abovethere are a million things that we do every day without thinking brushing our teeth drying our hair after a shower and unlocking our phone screen so we can check our messages are all part of our routine but what takes place in the brain as we learn a new habit what happens in the brain when habits take shape whats something youve learned to do without thinking it might be locking the door behind you as you leave which could lead to some panic later as you wonder if you actually remembered to do it it might be driving to work have you ever had that uncanny experience of finding yourself at your destination without fully remembering how you got there i certainly have and its all thanks to the brains trusty autopilot mode habits drive our lives so much so that sometimes we might want to break the habit as the saying goes and experience something new but habits are a useful tool when we do something enough times we become effortlessly good at it which is perhaps why aristotle reportedly believed that `` excellence is not an act but a habit '' so what does habit formation look like in the brain how do our neural networks behave as we learn something and consolidate it into an effortless behavior through repetition these are the questions that ann graybiel and her colleagues from the massachusetts institute of technology in chestnut hill set out to answer in a recent study the findings of which are published in the journal current biology bookending neural signals although a habitual action seems so simple and effortless it actually typically involves a string of small necessary movements such as unlocking the car getting into it adjusting the mirrors securing the seatbelt and so on this complex set of movements that amount to one routine action that we perform unconsciously is called `` chunking '' and although we know that it exists exactly how `` chunks '' form and stabilize has remained mysterious so far could this protein hold the key to memory to store or not to store learn about the protein that may hold the key to memory retention read now the new study now suggests that some brain cells are tasked with `` bookending '' the chunks that correspond to habitual actions in another study graybiel and her former team found that the striatum a region of the brain previously associated with decisionmaking also plays an important role in acquiring habits working with mice the team noted that the patterns of signals transmitted between neurons in the striatum shifted as the animals were taught a new sequence of actions turning in one direction at a sound signal while navigating a maze which then evolved into a habit at the beginning of the learning process the neurons in the mices striata emitted a continuous string of signals the scientists saw but as the mices actions started to consolidate into habitual movements the neurons fired their distinctive signals only at the beginning and at the end of the task performed when a signaling pattern takes root explain graybiel and colleagues a habit has taken shape and breaking it becomes a difficult endeavor brain patterns that indicate habits although edifying graybiels previous efforts did not establish for certain that the signaling patterns observed in the brain were related to habit formation they could simply have been motor commands that regulated the mices running behavior in order to confirm the idea that the patterns corresponded to the chunking associated with habit formation graybiel and her current team devised a different set of experiments in the new study they set out to teach rats to press two levers repeatedly in a specific order the researchers used reward conditioning to motivate the animals if they pressed the levers in the correct sequence they were offered chocolate milk to ensure that there would be no doubt regarding the solidity of the experiments results and that they would be able to identify brain activity patterns related to habit formation rather than anything else the scientists taught the rats different sequences sure enough once the animals had learned to press the levers in the sequence established by their trainers the team noticed the same `` bookending '' pattern in the striatum sets of neurons would fire signals at the beginning and end of a task thus delimitating a `` chunk '' `` i think '' explains graybiel `` this more or less proves that the development of bracketing patterns serves to package up a behavior that the brain and the animals consider valuable and worth keeping in their repertoire '' '' it really is a highlevel signal that helps to release that habit and we think the end signal says the routine has been done '' ann graybiel finally the team also noted the formation of another complementary pattern of activity in a group of inhibitory brain cells called `` interneurons '' in the striatum '' the interneurons '' explains lead study author nuné martiros of harvard university in cambridge ma `` were activated during the time when the rats were in the middle of performing the learned sequence '' she adds that the interneurons `` could possibly be preventing the principal neurons from initiating another routine until the current one was finished '' '' the discovery of this opposite activity by the interneurons '' martiros concludes `` also gets us one step closer to understanding how brain circuits can actually produce this pattern of activity ''eat well for a long and healthy life – thats a mantra that were all familiar with but what are the best foods to help us achieve that goal in this article we give you an overview of some of the most healthful and nutritious foods what are the best foods for a healthful diet we investigate official figures indicate that currently the top three countries in the world with the highest life expectancy are the principality of monaco japan and singapore these are places where the inhabitants experience a high quality of life and an important element of that is eating healthful meals often we find praise for `` superfoods '' in the media – foods so high in nutritional value that they are seen as dietary superheroes nutritionists reject the term `` superfoods '' as a buzzword that can influence people to place too high an expectation on a limited range of foods when in reality a balanced diet and healthful lifestyle require more effort than eating your fiveaday still there are certain foods that are more nutritious than others and many that as research has shown have a protective effect against a range of diseases here we give you an overview of some of the best foods that you may want to consider including in your diet in your quest for a happy healthy life edamame soybeans edamame or fresh soybeans have been a staple of asian cuisine for generations but they have also been gaining popularity on the western front of late soybeans are often sold in snack packs but they are also added to a varied range of dishes from soups to ricebased meals though they are served as cooked and seasoned on their own too edamame and tofu are rich in isoflavones which may have anticancer properties the beans are rich in isoflavones a type of phytoestrogen – that is plantderived estrogenlike substances isoflavones are known to have antiinflammatory antioxidant anticancer and antimicrobial properties thus they can help to regulate the inflammatory response of the body slow down cellular aging fight microbes as well as reportedly protect against certain types of cancer edamame are rich in two types of isoflavones in particular genistein and daidzein a study covered last year on medical news today found that genistein could be used to improve breast cancer treatment in the meantime the study authors note that `` lifetime intake of soy has been linked to reduced risk of breast cancer '' so we may want to include soybeans in our normal diet tofu soybean curd similarly tofu a white cheeselike product made of soybean curds has been linked to a wealth of health benefits for the same reasons tofu is often found cooked in typical eastern asian dishes it can be fried baked or boiled for instance in soups as a soy product it is rich in isoflavones whose health benefits weve outlined above it is also a good source of protein and it contains all the essential amino acids that our bodies need to synthesize protein moreover it is also rich in minerals which our bodies need to keep our teeth and bones strong and healthy and to derive energy tofu is a source of calcium iron manganese selenium phosphorous magnesium zinc and copper some specialists also suggest that eating tofu can make you feel fuller for longer so incorporating it into your meals may help to prevent overeating carrots this common culinary ingredient best known in its orange variety is famously recommended for its high content of betacarotene a pigment and carotenoid that gives the widespread version of this root vegetable its color carrots can protect against agerelated eyesight damage betacarotene can be converted by our bodies into vitamin a which according to the national institutes of health nih `` is involved in immune function vision reproduction and cellular communication '' our bodies can not produce vitamin a on their own so it must be derived from our diet this pigment is also an antioxidant that can protect the cells in our bodies from the aging damage caused by free radicals moreover research has shown that foods rich in carotenoids and of course carrots are a prime example here can protect against agerelated macular degeneration the vision damage caused by old age some varieties of carrots such as white carrots do not contain the orange pigment betacarotene but they do all contain falcarinol a nutrient which some studies claim may have a protective effect against cancer while raw carrots may be best for health as they retain their nutrients there are also ways of cooking carrots that can keep most of their nutrients `` locked in '' in an interview one researcher who investigated the anticancer effect of falcarinol from carrots kirsten brandt from newcastle university in the united kingdom suggests that we may want to boil our carrots whole if we want them cooked but still bursting with nutrients '' chopping up your carrots increases the surface area so more of the nutrients leach out into the water while they are cooked by keeping them whole and chopping them up afterwards you are locking in nutrients and the taste so the carrot is better for you all round '' cruciferous vegetables another important type of food on our list are cruciferous vegetables also known as `` brassica vegetables '' which include a wide array of green foods such as cabbage broccoli brussels sprouts cauliflower bok choy radish and kale cruciferous vegetables can bring a wealth of health benefits these vegetables boast an especially rich nutrient content including many vitamins c e k and folate minerals potassium calcium and selenium and carotenoids lutein betacarotene and zeaxanthin cruciferous vegetables also contain glucosinolates the substances that give these greens their characteristic pungent flavor these substances have been found to bring diverse health benefits some glucosinolates seem to regulate the bodys stress and inflammation response they have antimicrobial properties and some of them are being investigated for their anticancer potential one recent study covered on mnt found that leafy greens including some cruciferous vegetables such as kale and collard greens helped to slow down cognitive decline consequently the study researchers suggest that `` adding a daily serving of green leafy vegetables to your diet may be a simple way to foster your brain health '' kale broccoli and cabbage have also been shown to have a protective effect on heart health thanks to their vitamin k content finally cruciferous vegetables are also a great source of soluble fiber which plays a role in regulating blood sugar levels and diminishing the absorption of fat thus helping to prevent excess weight gain salmon recent studies have suggested that consumption of meat mostly red meat but also some kinds of poultry meat could be harmful to our health in the long run a good alternative for protein in this case is fish and salmon in particular affords many nutritional benefits salmon could protect cognitive health researchers say salmon is packed with protein and also contains plenty of omega3 fatty acids which is said to be beneficial for eyesight research has demonstrated that omega3 protects against dryeye syndrome characterized by insufficient lubrication of the eyes which can lead to soreness and blurred vision moreover omega3 fatty acids have been associated with brain health and research suggests that they can stave off cognitive decline associated with aging salmon also has a high potassium content and according to a new study reported on mnt last autumn potassium can prevent the onset of heart disease additionally this type of fish is rich in the mineral selenium which contributes to the health of the thyroid gland the thyroid gland helps to regulate hormonal activity and is involved in metabolic processes what are the best diets for 2018 learn which diets researchers recommend for a healthy life read now although both farmed and wild salmon are available on the market wild salmon has been found to be more nutritious overall with a higher protein content and also to have less saturated fat which means that it is more healthful and better for weight management however farmed salmon is a more sustainable resource and specialists say that the differences between farmed and wild caught salmon may not be so stark as to motivate us to prefer one type over the other citrus fruits finally citrus fruits are the unsung heroes of a healthful diet these include a number of fruits that are now available worldwide such as oranges grapefruit lemons limes clementines mandarins and tangerines the flavonoids in citrus fruits have been cited in connection to longer lifespans for a long time citrus fruits have been recommended by nutritionists and grandmothers alike for their high content of vitamin c which has antioxidant properties and is said to bring a wide array of health benefits including to reduce inflammatory damage and to fend off infections specialists point out however that this type of fruits goes well beyond just vitamin c when it comes to nutritional content '' the fruits are abundant in other macronutrients including sugars dietary fiber potassium folate calcium thiamin niacin vitamin b6 phosphorus magnesium copper riboflavin and pantothenic acid '' if this list of dietary goodies hasnt colored you impressed the specialists then go on to explain how citrus fruits contain even more organic compounds such as flavonoids coumarins and carotenoids that have been said to have protective effects against cancer cardiovascular diseases and neurodegenerative diseases research has shown that flavonoids in which citrus fruits are particularly rich can `` prevent or delay chronic diseases caused by obesity '' flavonoids have also garnered a lot of scientific attention for their anticancer potential and consumption of especially flavonoidrich citrus fruits has been associated with a significantly prolonged lifespan the inhabitants of the japanese prefecture of okinawa known to be some of the longestliving populations of the world regularly eat shikuwasa also known as `` shequasar '' a citrus fruit typical of the region which contains more flavonoids than most other citrus fruits drinking shikuwasa juice rich in flavonoid content has also been linked to better liver health although all of the foods mentioned above are appreciated for their significant health benefits we should not forget that wellbeing and longevity can not be achieved without a balanced inclusive diet and a healthful lifestyle moreover current studies suggest that our genetic makeup may have an important say as to which foods work best for our health so keeping our list of nutritious foods in mind make sure you follow the healthful diet that is most effective for youwhen it comes to new years resolutions eating better is at the top of our list but which diet plan is the best a panel of health experts on behalf of us news world report reveal the toprated diets for 2018 us news world report reveal the best diets for 2018 it is estimated that around 45 million people in the united states go on a diet each year with weight loss being the primary goal however whether youre dieting to lose weight or simply to improve overall health sticking to a specific eating plan can be challenging with so many diets to choose from how can you tell which one will work for you us news world report put together a panel of health experts every year to evaluate the most popular diets in the us this year the experts assessed 40 diets ranking them from lowest to highest in seven categories including the best diets for weight loss diabetes and heart health so we take a look at some of the key results the best diets for weight loss for the majority of dieters weight loss is the ultimate goal but losing weight and keeping it off is far from easy research suggests that approximately 30–35 percent of weight lost from dieting is regained within 1 year but it is possible to maintain weight loss its just a matter of finding the right eating plan the us news world report panel of experts evaluated 40 popular diets for their effects on both short and longterm weight loss noting that some people want to lose weight quickly while others want to maintain their weight loss for years to come the health experts rated weight watchers as the best diet on both accounts scoring 4 out of 5 for shortterm weight loss and 35 out of 5 for longterm weight loss a highfat diet without the weight gain study says its possible researchers say that there could be a way to avoid weight gain due to a highfat diet read now one of the longestrunning wellknown commercial diets weight watchers incorporates a points system wherein foods and beverages are assigned points based on their nutritional values and dieters are assigned a daily points allowance according to us news world report the expert panel `` appreciated the programs support system which helps dieters keep the pounds off '' the volumetrics diet came in at second place for best weight loss diet scoring 38 out of 5 for shortterm weight loss and 33 out of 5 for longterm weight loss designed by barbara rolls who is a professor of nutrition working at pennsylvania state university in centre county the volumetrics diet focuses on putting foods with lowenergy density such as lowfat milk grains and nonstarchy fruits and vegetables at the forefront of ones diet as well as limiting foods with highenergy density the best diets for heart health heart disease is the leading cause of death for men and women in the us killing around 610000 people in the country every year a poor diet can increase the risk of heart disease because eating food high in fat can lead to high blood pressure high cholesterol levels and obesity which are major risk factors for the condition but which eating plan is best for a healthy heart for this category the health experts analyzed each of the 40 diets and gave them average hearthealth ratings the dietary approaches to stop hypertension dash diet took first place in this category developed by the national heart lung and blood institute a part of the national institutes of health nih the dash diet is high in fruits vegetables whole grains fish poultry and lowfat dairy but it limits foods high in sugar and saturated and trans fats the dash diet was also ranked the best overall diet the mediterranean diet which emphasizes consuming fish and seafood at least twice weekly alongside regular consumption of fruits vegetables legumes and whole grains took joint second place for best hearthealthy diet alongside the ornish diet with the ornish diet fat is limited to 10 percent of daily calories and foods are divided into five groups from the least to most healthful the best diets for diabetes the mediterranean diet not only ranked highly for one of the best hearthealthy diets but it also took the crown for the best diabetes diet scoring 37 out of 5 it is estimated that around 303 million people in the us are living with diabetes wherein blood glucose levels become too high due to the bodys inability to produce or effectively use insulin although eating a healthful diet is important for all of us people with diabetes need to be extra cautious skipping meals or eating the wrong foods may lead to problematic highs and lows in blood glucose levels according to the panel `` the mediterranean diet is a great option for preventing or controlling diabetes some research has shown that diabetics on a mediterranean diet may improve their levels of hemoglobin a1c a measure of blood sugar over time '' the dash diet makes yet another appearance here ranking second in the best diabetes diet category with the experts noting that `` its menu looks a lot like widely accepted nutritional guidelines for those with the condition '' whichever eating plan that you decide is best for you its important to note that physical activity is just as important as the foods you eat current guidelines recommend that adults should engage in at least 150 minutes of moderateintensity or 75 minutes of vigorousintensity aerobic activity every weeka small pilot study of older people suggests that taking a daily supplement of a nutrient that is present naturally in foods may improve artery health and blood pressure a certain type of supplement may promote healthy arterial aging and reduced blood pressure the researchers at the university of colorado boulder found that the supplement called nicotinamide riboside mimics some of the effects of caloric restriction and activates several identical biological pathways studies of caloric restriction which have been done mainly in rodents and fruit flies and not so much in humans indicate that reducing daily calorie intake by a third may delay the aging process and lengthen lifespan the new study found that taking nicotinamide riboside supplements significantly improved blood pressure in people with mild hypertension or elevated blood pressure should the results be confirmed in a larger clinical trial the researchers think that they could have important implications in biomedicine such as increasing treatment options for elevated blood pressure elevated blood pressure and stage 1 high blood pressure are now defined as a blood pressure of 12080 or 13989 millimeters of mercury respectively which although is not high enough to justify medication is high enough to raise the risk for a heart attack or stroke currently the recommended options for people with elevated blood pressure include changes to diet and increasing physical activity senior study author doug seals who is a professor and researcher in the department of integrative physiology and his colleagues report their findings in a paper due to be published in the journal nature communications stiff arteries blood pressure and aging in a western culture stiffer arteries and the high blood pressure that results from them as we age is so common that it is accepted as a normal consequence of aging for example the american heart associations aha explanation of high blood pressure states `` the normal aging process can cause the big elastic arteries to become stiff over time '' in the united states an estimated 103 million adults have high blood pressure and this figure is expected to rise as the population continues to age however there is evidence that stiff arteries and high blood pressure are not necessarily a normal consequence of aging although genetics plays a role preserving artery health as we reach our 70s and beyond also depends on things that we can do something about such as lifestyle and diet nicotinamide riboside nicotinamide riboside is a trace nutrient present in certain foods such as cows milk and in higher concentrations in dietary supplement form studies have indicated that the nutrient contains `` unique properties as a vitamin b3 '' that include raising insulin sensitivity boosting the effects of exercise protecting the brain and resisting the harmful effects of a highfat diet high cholesterol in late life may mean better brain health learn how having a total cholesterol level higher in later life than it was in midlife is linked to a lower risk of marked cognitive decline read now for their study prof seals and his colleagues recruited 24 lean and healthy men and women from the boulder area their ages ranged from 55 to 79 and they were put into two groups one of the groups took 500 milligrams of nicotinamide riboside chloride twice per day for 6 weeks then spent another 6 weeks taking a placebo the other group followed the opposite pattern they took a placebo for 6 weeks and then a twicedaily 500milligram dose of nicotinamide riboside chloride for another 6 weeks the team analyzed blood samples that the subjects gave at the end of each treatment period and they took other `` physiological measurements '' at these times there were no serious side effects an evolutionary survival mechanism the results showed that taking 1000 milligrams of nicotinamide riboside each day increased levels of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide nad+ by 60 percent nad+ is a compound that activates sirtuins a group of enzymes thought to be responsible for the beneficial effects that calorie restriction has on healthy aging and longevity the compound levels of which tend to wane with age is involved in many of the bodys metabolic processes there is a theory which is supported by research that our bodies are programmed by evolution to conserve nad+ when food is scarce and that this is activated when we restrict calorie intake more recent research has also begun to investigate the possibility that older adults might regain this protective property and age more healthily by taking supplements of `` nad+ precursors '' such as nicotinamide riboside the results also found that nicotinamide riboside supplementation caused a drop in systolic blood pressure of 10 points in 13 of the participants who had elevated blood pressure or stage 1 high blood pressure this represents a 25 percent reduction in the risk of having a heart attack more work now needed to confirm findings the researchers conclude that their paper is a step forward in highlighting the potential benefits of nicotinamide riboside supplementation in older adults however they point out that there is still a lot of work to do to confirm that it is safe and effective they hope to investigate the specific impact of nicotinamide riboside on artery health and blood pressure more robustly in a larger clinical trial in the meantime another trial is about to investigate the effect of the supplement in older people with mild cognitive impairment a condition that often precedes alzheimers disease '' this was the first ever study to give this novel compound to humans over a period of time we found that it is welltolerated and appears to activate some of the same key biological pathways that calorie restriction does '' prof doug seals the study was partfunded by chromadex who make the supplements that the researchers usedapps are available for everything these days from shopping to entertainment and travel apps that claim to help look after your mental health and wellbeing are also available so we have selected the best apps for mental health mental health apps may help with conditions such as anxiety and depression as well as enhance psychological wellbeing approximately 483 million adults in the united states are faced with a mental health condition each year and 98 million of those are serious conditions that limit the activities of everyday life among us adults aged 18–44 mood disorders such as depression and bipolar disorder are now the third most common reason for hospitalizations furthermore those who live with severe mental illness are more likely to face chronic medical conditions and die around 25 years earlier exercising regularly and eating a healthful diet can boost mental health and wellbeing significantly help to reduce symptoms of depression anxiety and stress and increase endorphins responsible for happiness apps focus on protecting or improving mental health using methods including meditation hypnosis cognitive behavioral therapy cbt and providing a valuable support network medical news today have put together a list of the top 10 apps that can help to enhance your wellbeing and look after your mental health calm android free iphone free calm was branded as apples `` app of the year '' in 2017 the app is designed to reduce anxiety improve sleep and help you to feel happier calm focuses on the four key areas of meditation breathing sleep and relaxation with the aim of bringing joy clarity and peace to your daily life the app delivers meditations that can help you to destress as well as breathing programs music and sounds from nature to relax your mind and body and promote better sleep calm is the perfect app if you are new to meditation but it also offers programs for more advanced users meditation sessions are available in lengths of 3–25 minutes to fit in with your schedule headspace android free iphone free headspace uses mindfulness and meditation to help you perform at your best each day the apps mission is to provide you with the essential tools to achieve a happier healthier life whether you need to build healthier relationships find a place of calm keep your mind fit or reduce stress headspace has hundreds of themed mindfulness and meditation sessions to support you the app reports that meditation reduces daily stress and improves focus and attention what is more using headspace is suggested to enhance compassionate behavior toward others in just 3 weeks moodnotes iphone $ 399 moodnotes is a thought journal and mood diary the app can be used to capture your feelings and improve your thinking habits through the implementation of cbt and positive psychology track your mood and increase selfawareness of what influences it learn to recognize `` traps '' in your thinking and ways to rethink the situation if you happen to enter a `` thinking trap '' moodnotes will provide suggestions and useful perspectives to reduce stress and enhance wellbeing progress is viewable in the helpful `` insights '' dashboard googleadslotinfopush { '' slotname '' mnt_dlb1 '' slotcontainer '' mnt_dlb1_container } moodpath android free iphone free moodpath is your pocketsized mental health companion whether you are facing a rough patch or have concerns about your mental health the apps goal is to support you through the difficult times and guide you out the other side moodpath asks daily questions in order to assess your wellbeing and screen for symptoms of depression the screening progress aims to increase your awareness of your thoughts emotions and feelings after a period of 2 weeks the app generates an electronic document that you can discuss with a healthcare professional more than 150 videos and psychological exercises are available to help you understand your mood and strengthen your mental health pacifica android free iphone free pacifica is an app with anxiety and stress in mind it provides a toolbox to deal with daily anxiety and stress along with a highly supportive community of likeminded individuals pacifica helps you to break cycles of unhelpful thoughts feelings and behaviors through methods such as cbt mindfulness meditation mood tracking and relaxation the app houses audio lessons and activities that help you to cope with stress and depression and it sets daily challenges to help you tackle anxiety one day at a time and reach your longterm goals superbetter android free iphone free superbetter is a game focusing on increasing resilience and the ability to remain strong optimistic and motivated when presented with challenging obstacles in life a study by the university of pennsylvania in philadelphia found that when people played superbetter for 30 days their mood improved symptoms of anxiety and depression decreased and selfbelief to achieve goals increased the app will help you to adopt new habits improve your skills strengthen relationships complete meaningful projects and achieve lifelong dreams superbetter also has the potential to help you beat depression and anxiety cope with chronic illness and recover from posttraumatic stress disorder ptsd 7 cups android free iphone free if you are feeling lonely sad stressed or worried 7 cups could be the perfect app for you it provides online therapy and emotional support for anxiety and depression there are more than 160000 trained listeners and licensed therapists who are available to anonymously speak with 247 speak your mind and confide in listeners without the fear of being judged these listeners can be searched for based on their experience or their specialties such as bullying panic attacks eating disorders relationship breakups and many more affordable therapy with an online therapist can commence onetoone in a confidential setting anxiety relief hypnosis android free iphone free anxiety relief hypnosis is an app suggested to help improve relaxation and reduce anxiety within just 1–3 weeks of use the apps developers say that hypnosis can decrease anxious thoughts and enhance your response to relaxation which in turn resets your behavior and enables an improved response to stress the app provides an audio session read by a certified hypnotherapist together with calming music and sounds from nature to aid relaxation the `` awaken at end '' feature can be disabled to allow you to fall into restful sleep at bedtime happify android free iphone free happify is a space to overcome negative thoughts and stress and build resilience whether you are feeling stressed anxious or sad happify helps you to regain control of your thoughts and feelings in fact 86 percent of the apps users report feeling better about their lives after 2 months of using it happify employs techniques and evidencebased interventions in the areas of cbt positive psychology and mindfulness to help you break old and unhealthful patterns and form new healthful habits the app offers activities and games to improve your life satisfaction and ability to fight negativity your emotional wellbeing is calculated as a happiness score that you can improve upon each week talkspace android free iphone free talkspace is a counseling and therapy app that connects users with a convenient affordable and confidential way to deal with anxiety stress depression relationship issues and chronic illness a free consultation is provided with a matching agent to identify the ideal therapist for your needs based on several factors more than 1000 licensed therapists are available who specialize in anxiety phobia depression domestic violence ptsd and more after upgrading and becoming a member access is given to a secure chat room wherein you can raise and discuss your worries with your private counselor the apps pricing plans are described as being approximately 80 percent lower than traditional officebased appointments how to be happy in 2018 find out how to maintain your happiness this year read nowcancer is the leading cause of death across the globe for years now researchers have led meticulous studies focused on how to stop this deadly disease in its tracks how close are we to finding more effective treatments how far has cancer research come the world health organization who note that worldwide nearly 1 in 6 deaths are down to cancer in the united states alone the national cancer institute nci estimated 1688780 new cancer cases and 600920 cancerrelated deaths in 2017 currently the most common types of cancer treatment are chemotherapy radiotherapy tumor surgery and in the case prostate cancer and breast cancer hormonal therapy however other types of treatment are beginning to pick up steam therapies that on their own or in combination with other treatments are meant to help defeat cancer more efficiently and ideally have fewer side effects innovations in cancer treatment aim to address a set of issues that will typically face healthcare providers and patients including aggressive treatment accompanied by unwanted side effects tumor recurrence after treatment surgery or both and aggressive cancers that are resilient to widely utilized treatments below we review some of the most recent cancer research breakthroughs that give us renewed hope that better therapies and prevention strategies will soon follow suit boosting the immune systems arsenal one type of therapy that has attracted a lot of attention recently is immunotherapy which aims to reinforce our own bodies existing arsenal against foreign bodies and harmful cells our immune systems response to the spread of cancer tumors but many types of cancer cell are so dangerous because they have ways of `` duping '' the immune system either into ignoring them altogether or else into giving them a `` helping hand '' lung cancer tumor growth halved with new approach to stop cancer from spreading we may have to look at mysterious noncoding molecules a recent study suggests read now therefore some types of aggressive cancer are able to spread more easily and become resistant to chemotherapy or radiotherapy however thanks to in vitro and in vivo experiments researchers are now learning how they might be able to `` deactivate '' the cancer cells protective systems a study published last year in nature immunology found that macrophages or white blood cells that are normally tasked with `` eating up '' cellular debris and other harmful foreign `` objects '' failed to obliterate the superaggressive cancer cells that was because in their interaction with the cancer cells the macrophages read not one but two signals meant to repel their `` cleansing '' action this knowledge however also showed the scientists the way forward by blocking the two relevant signaling pathways they reenabled the white blood cells to do their work therapeutic viruses and innovative vaccines a surprising weapon in the fight against cancer could be therapeutic viruses as revealed by a team from the united kingdom earlier this year in their experiments they managed to use a reovirus to attack brain cancer cells while leaving healthy cells alone '' this is the first time it has been shown that a therapeutic virus is able to pass through the brainblood barrier '' explained the study authors which `` opens up the possibility that this type of immunotherapy could be used to treat more people with aggressive brain cancers '' another area for improvement in immunotherapy is `` dendritic vaccines '' a strategy wherein dendritic cells which play a key role in the bodys immune response are collected from a persons body `` armed '' with tumorspecific antigens which will teach them to `` hunt '' and destroy relevant cancer cells and injected back into the body to boost the immune system in a new study researchers in switzerland identified a way to improve the action of these dendritic vaccines by creating artificial receptors able to recognize and `` abduct '' tiny vesicles that have been linked to cancer tumors spread in the body by attaching these artificial receptors to the dendritic cells in the `` vaccines '' the therapeutic cells are enabled to recognize harmful cancer cells with more accuracy importantly recent studies have shown that immunotherapy may work best if delivered in tandem with chemotherapy specifically if the chemotherapy drugs are delivered first and they are followed up with immunotherapy but this approach does have some pitfalls it is difficult to control the effects of this combined method so sometimes healthy tissue may be attacked alongside cancer tumors however scientists from two institutions in north carolina have developed a substance that once injected into the body becomes gellike a `` bioresponsive scaffold system '' the scaffold can hold both chemotherapy and immunotherapy drugs at once releasing them systematically into primary tumors this method allows for a better control of both therapies ensuring that the drugs act on the targeted tumor alone the nanoparticle revolution speaking of specially developed tools for delivering drugs straight to the tumor and hunting down micro tumors with accuracy and efficiency the past couple of years have seen a `` boom '' in nanotechnology and nanoparticle developments for cancer treatments nanoparticles could be a gamechanger in cancer treatment nanoparticles are microscopic particles that have garnered so much attention in clinical research among other fields because they bring us the chance to develop precise less invasive methods of tackling disease vitally they can target cancer cells or cancer tumors without harming healthy cells in the surrounding environment some nanoparticles have now been created to provide very focused hyperthermic treatment which is a type of therapy that uses hot temperatures to make cancer tumors shrink last year scientists from china and the uk managed to come up with a type of `` selfregulating '' nanoparticle that was able to expose tumors to heat while avoiding contact with healthy tissue '' this could potentially be a gamechanger in the way we treat people who have cancer '' said one of the researchers in charge of this project these tiny vehicles can also be used to target cancer stemlike cells which are undifferentiated cells that have been linked to the resilience of certain types of cancer in the face of traditional treatments such as chemotherapy thus nanoparticles can be `` loaded '' with drugs and set to `` hunt down '' cancer stem cells to prevent the growth or recurrence of tumors scientists have experimented with drugfilled nanoparticles in the treatment of various types of cancer including breast cancer and endometrial cancer no less importantly minuscule vehicles called `` nanoprobes '' can be used to detect the presence of micrometastases which are secondary tumors so tiny that they can not be seen using traditional methods dr steven k libutti director of the rutgers cancer institute of new jersey in new brunswick calls micrometastases `` the achilles heel of surgical management for cancer '' and argues that nanoprobes `` go a long way to solving such problems '' tumor starvation strategies another type of strategy that researchers have been investigating of late is that of `` starving '' tumors of the nutrients they need to grow and spread this scientists point out could be a saving grace in the case of aggressive resilient cancers that can not effectively be eradicated otherwise one novel method of attacking cancer is by starving cancer cells to death three different studies whose results were all published in january this year looked at ways of cutting off cancers nutritional supplies one of these studies looked at ways of stopping glutamine a naturally occurring amino acid from feeding cancer cells certain cancers such as breast lung and colon are known to use this amino acid to support their growth by blocking cancer cells access to glutamine the researchers managed to maximize the impact of oxidative stress a process that eventually induces cell death on these cells some aggressive types of breast cancer may be halted by stopping the cells from `` feeding '' on a particular enzyme that helps them to produce the energy they need to thrive another way of depleting cancer cells of energy is by blocking their access to vitamin b2 as researchers from the university of salford in the uk have observed as one study author says `` this is hopefully the beginning of an alternative approach to halting cancer stem cells '' this strategy could help individuals receiving cancer treatment to avoid the toxic side effects of chemotherapy cancer treatments and epigenetics epigenetics refers to the changes caused in our bodies by alterations in gene expression which dictate whether certain characteristics appear or if certain `` actions '' are affected at a biological level according to research that addressed the impact of such changes many cancers as well as the behaviors of cancer cells are determined by epigenetic factors '' recent advances in the field of epigenetics have shown that human cancer cells harbor global epigenetic abnormalities in addition to numerous genetic alterations '' '' these genetic and epigenetic alterations interact at all stages of cancer development working together to promote cancer progression '' thus it is crucial for specialists to understand when and where to intervene and the expression of which genes they may need to switch on or off depending on their role in the development of cancer one study for instance found that the gene responsible for the advent of huntingtons disease produces a set of molecules whose action may actually prevent cancer from occurring now the researchers challenge is to channel the therapeutic potential of this process without triggering huntingtons disease however the scientists are hopeful '' we believe a shortterm treatment cancer therapy for a few weeks might be possible '' says the studys senior author another recent study was able to establish that estrogenreceptor positive breast cancers that become resistant to chemotherapy gain their resilience through genetic mutations that `` confer a metastatic advantage to the tumor '' but this knowledge also gave researchers the `` break '' that they needed to come up with an improved treatment for such stubborn tumors a combination therapy that delivers the chemotherapeutic drug fulvestrant alongside an experimental enzyme inhibitor what does this all mean cancer research is running at full speed taking advantage of all the technological advances that science has achieved over recent years but what does that mean in terms of coming up with a cure for cancer whether or not there will ever be a cure for all cancer types is currently a matter of strong debate although promising studies are published and covered by the media almost every day cancer types vary immensely this makes it very difficult to say that an approach that works for one type will be adaptable to all also while there is much emerging research promising more effective treatments most of these projects are still in their early stages having conducted in vitro and in vivo experiments some potential treatments still have a long way to go before clinical trials in human patients still that doesnt mean we should lose all hope some researchers explain that these efforts should make us optimistic while we may not be at the stage where we can claim that cancer can easily be eradicated our furthered knowledge and ever more precise tools keep us ahead of the game and improve our odds in the fight against this diseasenew research published in the journal aging finds a compound that stops cancer cells from spreading by starving them of vitamin b2 the findings may revolutionize traditional chemotherapy current chemotherapy has a wide range of serious side effects but that may be about to change suggests new research a team of britishbased researchers set out to find a nontoxic therapeutic agent that targets the mitochondria of cancer cells mitochondria are energyproducing organelles found inside each cell the compound recently found by the scientists can stop cancer stemlike cells from proliferating by interfering with their energycreating process inside the mitochondria the team was led by prof michael lisanti the chair of translational medicine at the university of salford in the united kingdom and the new study can be accessed here starving cancer cells of energy prof lisanti and his colleagues used drugscreening to identify the compound which is called diphenyleneiodonium chloride dpi as the researchers explain various cell assays and other cell culture experiments revealed that dpi reduced over 90 percent of the energy produced in the cells mitochondria dpi achieved this by blocking vitamin b2 also known as riboflavin which depleted the cells of energy '' our observation is that dpi is selectively attacking the cancer stem cells by effectively creating a vitamin deficiency in other words by turning off energy production in cancer stem cells we are creating a process of hibernation '' prof michael lisanti the cancer stem cells are the ones that produce the tumor `` its extraordinary '' continues prof lisanti `` the cells just sit there as if in a state of suspended animation '' importantly dpi proved to be nontoxic for socalled `` bulk '' cancer cells which are largely thought to be nontumorigenic is chemo at the heart of cancer regrowth paradoxically the very treatment that is supposed to stop cancer from spreading sometimes enables it to do so read now this suggests that the compound might be successful where current chemotherapy fails the team explains `` dpi treatment can be used to acutely confer a mitochondrialdeficient phenotype which we show effectively depletes cancer stemlike cells from the heterogeneous cancer cell population '' '' these findings have significant therapeutic implications for potently targeting cancer stemlike cells while minimizing toxic side effects '' they add a new era of chemotherapy '' we believe '' say the scientists `` that dpi is one of the most potent and highly selective cancer stemlike cells inhibitors discovered to date '' the findings are particularly significant given the dire need for nontoxic cancer therapies and the serious side effects of conventional chemotherapy '' the beauty of dpi is that it makes the cancer stem cells metabolically inflexible so that they will be highly susceptible to many other drugs '' explains prof lisanti study coauthor prof federica sotgia also comments on the significance of the recent findings saying `` in terms of chemotherapies for cancer we clearly need something better than what we have at present and this is hopefully the beginning of an alternative approach to halting cancer stem cells '' in fact the authors specialize in finding alternative nontoxic therapies and they hope that their most recent findings will mark the beginning of a new era of chemotherapy perhaps one that uses nontoxic molecules to target the mitochondrial activity of cancer stemlike cells the researchers propose to call these new molecules `` mitoflavoscins ''periods usually arrive once each month but the exact date flow cramp severity and accompanying symptoms are not quite that consistent for this very reason the app market is flooded with period trackers that aim to offer insight into your monthly cycle period tracking apps can help you to learn more about your cycle and plan for future periods bleeding occurs every 28 days for the majority of women but it is common for the menstrual cycle to be either shorter or longer in duration and for bleeding to start anywhere from day 21 to day 40 period length may also vary and last for 3–8 days with an average of 5 days bleeding is often heaviest on days 1 and 2 and starts to become lighter thereafter tracking your period can be useful for several reasons period tracking can help you to get to know your own body and cycle and observe any symptoms such as mood swings or headaches that may occur during a particular phase of your cycle period tracking can help to identify any changes to your menstrual cycle that may be an indicator of potential health issues furthermore using period tracking apps can tell you when you are likely to be most fertile if you are avoiding pregnancy or trying to become pregnant there are hundreds of apps that track and analyze the menstrual cycle so how do you know which one is the best fit for you medical news today have tried and tested apps galore to bring you a selection of the top 10 apps to start tracking your period today period calendar android free iphone free period calendar can help to track and predict your period plus provide information on your fertile window and potential ovulation date in addition to the basic menstrual cycle tracking function the app can be used to record temperature intercourse birth control weight cervical mucus mood and any other symptoms the pill reminder ensures that you will never forget a dose ever again whether you need to remember to take medications supplements birth control pills or even an injection the pill tracker can be set up to remind you flo period tracker android free iphone free if you are wondering when you last had a period or would like to know when your next one is due you can easily find out using flo flo uses machine learning to accurately and reliably predict menstruation and ovulation using the apps bold and simple calendar you will be able to log how you are feeling your symptoms sex drive and menstruation flow the app can also be used to track sleep water consumption and physical activity the insights dashboard helps you to learn more about your body and cycle and it also provides personalized health insights each day clue android free iphone free clue has been ranked as the top period and ovulation tracking app by the obstetrics gynecology journal which is a publication of the american college of obstetricians and gynecologists clue uses science to help its users to identify unique patterns in their menstrual cycle with the apps period tracker multiple mood trackers health logs and exercise trackers your health and menstrual cycle will no longer be a mystery the developers promise to be inclusive of all ages and never use butterflies flowers euphemisms or pink the apps unique algorithm learns from the data that you add which means that the more you use clue the smarter it will become my calendar android free iphone free my calendar is a sophisticated elegant and very customizable period tracker it can help those with irregular cycles as well as people who have worries about conceiving birth control and contraception with my calendar you can track regular and irregular periods temperature weight moods symptoms and blood flow with its discreet reminders you can be prepared for approaching periods along with ovulation and fertile days you can access all your essential information using the health tracker at a glance and the calendar can be passwordprotected to ensure that your information remains private glow android free iphone free glow can track your period and record your symptoms mood sexual activity and medications glows datadriven menstrual and ovulation calculator helps women to take control of their reproductive health the app can forecast periods and ovulation and its predictions become smarter over time not only can the app help women who are avoiding or attempting pregnancy but it also helps those who are undergoing fertility treatments such as intrauterine insemination and in vitro fertilization you can make charts of your menstrual and fertility data set medication birth control and ovulation reminders as well as log more than 40 different health signals glow also offers a subscription to unlock comparative insights premium articles private messaging and premium support eve android free iphone free eve is a savvy period tracker that predicts upcoming periods and your chances of pregnancy discover trends in your cycle by logging your moods and symptoms and view your health data in eyecatching charts with eve you can review past periods forecast future periods and ovulation and visualize your cycle history in a new way with eves interactive staircase the app provides access to a community where you can discuss periods sex and health if you are concerned about anything at all ask the community no subject is off limits and you can learn from those who have had similar experiences period tracker lite android free iphone free the period tracker lite app makes logging menstrual cycles quick and easy press a button at the start of each period and period tracker lite will record your data and use the average of 3 months worth of data to calculate your next period take notes each day about your symptoms such as flow cramps bloating backache headache and tender breasts your weight temperature and a choice of more than 30 moods can also be selected period dates fertility days and ovulation are all shown in a simple monthview calendar the app provides comprehensive charts that illustrate weight changes temperature period length cycle length and symptoms period plus iphone free period plus can help you to keep in touch with the duration of your menstrual cycles and tells you when the next one will begin the app sends you reminders of your next period and fertile window helping you to get to know your cycle and plan ahead with birth control pregnancy planning and even vacations period plus tracks period duration and intensity cramp intensity breast tenderness breakouts migraines basal body temperature cervical mucus sexual activity exercise pregnancy test results sleep patterns and more my cycles android free iphone free regardless of whether you are trying to conceive or become an expert on when your next period is due my cycles can help my cycles tracks periods in a handy calendar and predicts future ones wherever you are you can track your period symptoms mood and medications with my cycles in an instant record your periods view them at a glance with the easytoread calendar and plan periods fertile days and ovulation for the next 12 months if you are trying to get pregnant the app lets you know when your chances of conceiving are higher with helpful reminders likewise it tells you when to use extra protection if you are not trying to conceive cycles iphone free the cycles app is a simple period and fertility tracker that requires little input irrespective of having regular or irregular periods with cycles all you need to do is turn the dial on the first day of your period and thats it the app automatically adjusts your cycle length cycles is designed so that you can invite your partner to the app to keep up with your cycle this feature is useful so that your partner can provide emotional support plan trips and romantic evenings and know when your most fertile days are if you are trying to conceive the app uses scientifically backed fertility tracking that predicts fertility with an accuracy of up to 95 percent optional password protection keeps your information secure from prying eyes seven tips for relieving period bloating here are some tips about how to relieve periodrelating bloating read nowwant to get fit this year but dont know where to start we have chosen the best fitness blogs to empower you and help to get you started on your journey to tiptop physical fitness fitness blogs aim to inspire empower and motivate you to reach your health and fitness goals getting up off the couch and taking part in regular physical activity is one of the most important things you can do to ensure you remain healthy regular exercise can help to control your weight strengthen your bones and muscles and reduce your risk of cardiovascular disease type 2 diabetes and some cancers furthermore being active improves your mood mental health mobility and ability to complete tasks as an older adult as well as increases your chances of living longer adults are recommended to do at least 150 minutes of moderateintensity physical activity each week to achieve substantial health benefits and increase to 300 minutes for more extensive benefits if you are stuck on where to begin or are worried about getting injured the good news is that aerobic activity such as brisk walking is considered to be safe for most people hundreds of fitness blogs are also available to help you on your way and provide tips ideas and information on the best types of activity to boost fitness and instructions on how to do them medical news today have trawled through the many fitness blogs out there to bring you the top 10 fitness blogs for 2018 myfitnesspal blog myfitnesspal is a smartphone app and website that records physical activity and diet the app works out the optimal intake of calories and nutrients for the user to accomplish their goals and it uses elements of gaming to motivate them myfitnesspals blog focuses on providing easytoread information on eating psychology nutrition weight loss fitness inspiration workout guides and motivational support through the victory stories on the blog fitness posts include seven tips to lift weights without causing injury songs that should feature on your 2018 running playlist and brain and bodyboosting moves that you should add to your next walk visit the myfitnesspal blog natalie jill fitness natalie jill fitness was founded after natalie jill gained weight straight after losing her house retiring and ending her marriage she turned her life around and in the process became an inspiration to others natalie specializes in fitness weight loss healthy lifestyles and body weight training natalie coaches motivates and empowers people to stop making excuses and instead make solutions to become the best version of themselves recent posts on her blog include a bootybuilding workout to activate your glutes an upper body workout using just your body weight and how to do a chin up visit the natalie jill fitness blog ace ace is an acronym for the american council on exercise ace are a nonprofit organization that certifiy exercise professionals and health coaches aces vision is to get people moving and provide scientifically backed education to fitness professionals and health enthusiasts to make an impact on preventable diseases related to inactivity by 2035 their expert articles cover fitness topics such as exercises to improve agility lower body exercises to complete instead of doing squats and the many types of strength and their benefits visit the ace blog born fitness adam bornstein developed born fitness with the aim of taking the stress out of health nutrition and fitness whether you hope to lose weight gain muscle eat more healthfully or live longer born fitness provide solutions to fit your needs the born fitness team will help you to identify the diets strategies exercises and workouts that are best suited to you so that you can apply them to your life achieve your goals and live stronger and longer activities are available on the blog to suit all levels of fitness from beginner to advanced training posts include how to incorporate resistance bands into your routine preventing knee back and shoulder injuries during your workouts and the truth about the 7minute workout visit the born fitness blog the fitnessista the fitnessista is a healthy lifestyle blog written by gina harney who is a fitness instructor personal trainer and weight loss specialist based in san diego ca gina is a mom of two and she shares snippets of her family life on the blog along with quick effective workouts and healthful recipes that are super speedy to put together the latest posts on the fitnessista include things to help with fitness motivation the barre hiit workout that you can practice anywhere and a strength and cardio workout that can be completed on a park bench visit the fitnessista blog suzanne bowen fitness suzanne bowen compiled all of the training that she had received and given over the course of 16 years and created suzanne bowen fitness suzanne is also the creator of barreamped which is an internationally taught barre fitness technique regardless of whether you havent exercised for a while or if you are a seasoned expert suzanne has workouts that range from 10 minutes to over an hour that are effective for everyone the blog provides challenges and workouts to boost your fitness levels such as the crunchless abs workout a light weight routine for the upper body and a rebounding workout and its benefits visit the suzanne bowen fitness blog knockedup fitness erica ziel is a mother of three and the founder of knockedup fitness erica is a personal trainer and expert for fitnessinfused pilates with more than 10 years experience training numerous clients erica is an expert in prenatal and postnatal training and teaching women how to strengthen their core muscles for an easier pregnancy delivery and recovery the knockedup fitness blog delivers real and relevant topics to the busy mom or momtobe with articles such as why its important to properly strengthen your core how to prevent and relieve back pain during pregnancy and how movement can prepare your body for birth visit the knockedup fitness blog lisa gulley established workout mommy in 2007 to provide health and fitness information for moms lisa says that as a mom of four boys she is fully aware of how being a mom requires you to look after someone other than yourself 247 and that finding the time to exercise is a challenge lisa aims to provide the inspiration motivation and ideas you need to fit fitness exercise and health into your busy schedule and keep your sanity in check posts on workout mommy include ways to overcome a negative mindset tips on how to start a fitness routine and the types of cardio exercises that are best for women visit the workout mommy blog love sweat fitness katie dunlop is a certified personal trainer group fitness instructor and the creator of love sweat fitness she started love sweat fitness with the aim of inspiring women all over the world to find their happy and healthy body after college katie found herself overweight by 45 pounds and was fed up with trendy workouts and fad diets she decided to take her fitness and health into her own hands lost her excess weight and identified her true passion for helping women to reach their goals inspiring posts on katies blog include ways to make your morning workout the best part of your day five tips for a happier and healthier you this year and how to train for a 10k run visit the love sweat fitness blog nerd fitness nerd fitness say that they are a community of misfits mutants and underdogs that are ready to help you on your fitness journey whether you are overweight and frustrated in danger of serious health issues want to become a healthier parent or just want to look after or feel better about yourself nerd fitness aim to help you to make small changes so that you can live a happier healthier and more fulfilling life blog posts include the main differences between weight loss success and failure the number of calories you burn while walking and how to get strong like logan with the wolverine workout visit the nerd fitness blog the 10 best fitness apps pair these blogs with the apps listed here to boost your chances of becoming fit and healthy read nowa new study may have revealed a possible new prevention and treatment strategy for osteoarthritis which is one of the most common and debilitating agerelated diseases in the united states researchers suggest that increasing levels of foxo proteins could be one way to prevent and treat osteoarthritis researchers at the scripps research institute tsri in san diego ca reveal that proteins called foxo are key for joint health by boosting the levels of these foxo proteins they believe that it might be possible to treat osteoarthritis or even stop the disease from developing senior study author dr martin lotz from the department of molecular medicine at tsri and his team recently reported their results in the journal science translational medicine osteoarthritis also referred to as degenerative joint disease is estimated to affect more than 30 million adults in the united states making it the most common type of arthritis the condition is characterized by a breakdown of cartilage which is the tissue that cushions the joints of the bones osteoarthritis most commonly affects the knee hip and hand joints in a previous study dr lotz and team found that foxo levels in joint cartilage are reduced for this latest study the researchers sought to find out more about how foxo proteins affect joint health the effects of foxo deficiency in mice the researchers reached their findings by studying mice that were lacking foxo proteins in their joint cartilage compared with control mice the scientists found that foxodeficient mice experienced degeneration of the joints at a significantly younger age what is more the rodents with foxo deficiency showed greater susceptibility to cartilage damage during a treadmill test and they were also more likely to develop posttraumatic osteoarthritis due to knee injury osteoarthritis could this algae extract lead to a cure researchers reveal how an algae extract may offer a cure for osteoarthritis read now upon further investigation the scientists found that the foxodeficient mice showed abnormalities in a process called autophagy which is a natural process by which cells get rid of any unwanted or damaged components in order to maintain their health and carry out any repairs foxo deficiency also led to abnormalities in the processes that protect our cells against damage caused by free radicals additionally the study revealed that mice lacking foxo proteins failed to produce the required levels of a protein called lubricin which helps to protect joint cartilage against wear and tear the reduced production of lubricin was linked to a reduction in healthy cells in the `` superficial zone '' which is a layer of cartilage in the knee joint boosting foxo may prevent osteoarthritis so why does foxo cause these issues the researchers found that foxo proteins regulate the expression of genes that are important for joint health including those that control inflammation and autophagy the absence of foxo proteins in the joint cartilage leads to an increase in inflammation and a decrease in autophagy meaning that cells are unable to repair any damage '' the housekeeping mechanisms which keep cells healthy were not working in these knockout mice '' says dr lotz for the final part of their study the scientists wanted to see whether boosting foxo levels could restore these `` housekeeping mechanisms '' by increasing foxo expression in cells taken from people with osteoarthritis the researchers were able to normalize the expression of genes associated with inflammation and autophagy and the production of lubricin was also restored the team now plans to create molecules that can increase foxo levels and assess their effects in experimental osteoarthritis models '' drugs that boost the expression and activity of foxo could be a strategy for preventing and treating osteoarthritis '' dr martin lotzaccording to the national institutes of health people have used marijuana or cannabis to treat their ailments for at least 3000 years however the food and drug administration have not deemed marijuana safe or effective in the treatment of any medical condition although cannabidiol a substance that is present in marijuana received approval in june 2018 as a treatment for some types of epilepsy marijuana is being increasingly legalized in the us but is it safe this tension between a widespread belief that marijuana is an effective treatment for a wide assortment of ailments and a lack of scientific knowledge on its effects has been somewhat exacerbated in recent times by a drive toward legalization twentynine states plus the district of columbia have now made marijuana available for medical and in some states recreational purposes a recent study published in the journal addiction also found that use of marijuana is increasing sharply across the united states although this rise may not be linked to the legalization of marijuana in participating states nevertheless this rise in use is prompting major public health concerns in this article we look at the scientific evidence weighing the medical benefits of marijuana against its associated health risks in an attempt to answer this simple question is marijuana good or bad what are the medical benefits of marijuana over the years research has yielded results to suggest that marijuana may be of benefit in the treatment of some conditions these are listed below chronic pain last year a large review from the national academies of sciences engineering and medicine assessed more than 10000 scientific studies on the medical benefits and adverse effects of marijuana one area that the report looked closely at was the use of medical marijuana to treat chronic pain chronic pain is a leading cause of disability affecting more than 25 million adults in the us the review found that marijuana or products containing cannabinoids which are the active ingredients in marijuana or other compounds that act on the same receptors in the brain as marijuana are effective at relieving chronic pain alcoholism and drug addiction another comprehensive review of evidence published last year in the journal clinical psychology review revealed that using marijuana may help people with alcohol or opioid dependencies to fight their addictions but this finding may be contentious the national academies of sciences review suggests that marijuana use actually drives increased risk for abusing and becoming dependent on other substances also the more that someone uses marijuana the more likely they are to develop a problem with using marijuana individuals who began using the drug at a young age are also known to be at increased risk of developing a problem with marijuana use depression posttraumatic stress disorder and social anxiety the review published in clinical psychology review assessed all published scientific literature that investigated the use of marijuana to treat symptoms of mental illness evidence to date suggests that marijuana could help to treat some mental health conditions its authors found some evidence supporting the use of marijuana to relieve depression and posttraumatic stress disorder symptoms that being said they caution that marijuana is not an appropriate treatment for some other mental health conditions such as bipolar disorder and psychosis the review indicates that there is some evidence to suggest that marijuana might alleviate symptoms of social anxiety but again this is contradicted by the national academies of sciences engineering and medicine review which instead found that regular users of marijuana may actually be at increased risk of social anxiety cancer evidence suggests that oral cannabinoids are effective against nausea and vomiting caused by chemotherapy and some small studies have found that smoked marijuana may also help to alleviate these symptoms alcohol more damaging to brain health than marijuana a recent study suggests that alcohol may cause more harm to the brain than marijuana read now some studies on cancer cells suggest that cannabinoids may either slow down the growth of or kill some types of cancer however early studies that tested this hypothesis in humans revealed that although cannabinoids are a safe treatment they are not effective at controlling or curing cancer multiple sclerosis the shortterm use of oral cannabinoids may improve symptoms of spasticity among people with multiple sclerosis but the positive effects have been found to be modest epilepsy in june 2018 the food and drug administration fda approved the use of a medication containing cannabidiol cbd to treat two rare severe and specific types of epilepsy called lennoxgastaut syndrome and dravet syndrome that are difficult to control with other types of medication this cbdbased drug is known as epidiolex cbd is one of many substances that occurs in cannabis it is not psychoactive the drug for treating these conditions involves a purified form of cbd the approval was based on the findings of research and clinical trials a study published in 2017 found that the use of cbd resulted in far fewer seizures among children with dravet syndrome compared with a placebo dravet syndrome seizures are prolonged repetitive and potentially lethal in fact 1 in 5 children with dravet syndrome do not reach the age of 20 years in the study 120 children and teenagers with dravet syndrome all of whom were aged between 2 and 18 were randomly assigned to receive an oral cbd solution or a placebo for 14 weeks along with their usual medication the researchers found that the children who received the cbd solution went from having around 12 seizures per month to an average of six seizures per month three children receiving cbd did not experience any seizures at all children who received the placebo also saw a reduction in seizures but this was slight their average number of seizures went down from 15 each month before the study to 14 seizures per month during the study the researchers say that this 39 percent reduction in seizure occurrence provides strong evidence that the compound can help people living with dravet syndrome and that their paper has the first rigorous scientific data to demonstrate this however the study also found a high rate of side effects linked to cbd more than 9 in 10 of the children treated with cbd experienced side effects most commonly vomiting fatigue and fever the patient information leaflet for epidiolex warns of side effects such as liver damage sedation and thoughts of suicide what are the health risks of marijuana at the other end of the spectrum is the plethora of studies that have found negative associations between marijuana use and health they are listed below mental health problems daily marijuana use is believed to exacerbate existing symptoms of bipolar disorder among people who have this mental health problem however the national academies of sciences engineering and medicine report suggests that among people with no history of the condition there is only limited evidence of a link between marijuana use and developing bipolar disorder moderate evidence suggests that regular marijuana users are more likely to experience suicidal thoughts and there is a small increased risk of depression among marijuana users marijuana use is likely to increase risk of psychosis including schizophrenia but a curious finding among people with schizophrenia and other psychoses is that a history of marijuana use is linked with improved performance on tests assessing learning and memory testicular cancer although there is no evidence to suggest any link between using marijuana and an increased risk for most cancers the national academies of sciences did find some evidence to suggest an increased risk for the slowgrowing seminoma subtype of testicular cancer respiratory disease regular marijuana smoking is linked to increased risk of chronic cough but `` it is unclear '' whether smoking marijuana worsens lung function or increases the risk of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or asthma a 2014 study that explored the relationship between marijuana use and lung disease suggested that it was plausible that smoking marijuana could contribute to lung cancer though it has been difficult to conclusively link the two the authors of that study published in the journal current opinion in pulmonary medicine conclude '' there is unequivocal evidence that habitual or regular marijuana smoking is not harmless a caution against regular heavy marijuana usage is prudent '' '' the medicinal use of marijuana is likely not harmful to lungs in low cumulative doses '' they add `` but the dose limit needs to be defined recreational use is not the same as medicinal use and should be discouraged '' so is marijuana good or bad for your health there is evidence that demonstrates both the harms and health benefits of marijuana yet despite the emergence over the past couple of years of very comprehensive uptodate reviews of the scientific studies evaluating the benefits and harms of the drug its clear that more research is needed to fully determine the public health implications of rising marijuana use more research is needed to confirm the harms and benefits of marijuana use many scientists and health bodies including the american cancer society acs support the need for further scientific research on the use of marijuana and cannabinoids to treat medical conditions however there is an obstacle to this marijuana is classed as a schedule i controlled substance by the drug enforcement administration which deters the study of marijuana and cannabinoids through its imposition of strict conditions on the researchers working in this area if you happen to live in a state where medical use of marijuana is legal you and your doctor will need to carefully consider these factors and how they relate to your illness and health history before using this drug for instance while there is some evidence to support the use for marijuana for pain relief you should certainly avoid marijuana if you have a history of mental health problems remember to always speak to your doctor before taking a new medicinewith so many diet types to choose from how do we know which one will suit us best one problem that may face us is deciding whether to go lowfat or lowcarb what does research have to say about it one of the most difficult decisions when it comes to weight loss diets is picking one that will work well for you keto diets mediterranean diets fasting diets there are so many options out there for people who want to lose weight however choosing a diet is tricky how do we know which one will work best for us or if the diet will work at all researchers at the stanford university school of medicine in california have recently conducted a study exploring one key aspect of this `` best diet '' question whether lowfat or lowcarb diets are more effective what lead study author prof christopher gardner and colleagues found however might only make the matter more complicated '' weve all heard stories '' says prof gardner `` of a friend who went on one diet it worked great and then another friend tried the same diet and it didnt work at all its because were all very different and were just starting to understand the reasons for this diversity '' '' maybe we shouldnt be asking whats the best diet but whats the best diet for whom '' prof christopher gardner prof gardner and team worked with 609 people aged 18–50 with an almost 5050 maletofemale ratio the participants were split into two groups and randomly assigned one of two diets lowcarb or lowfat all of the study participants followed their assigned diet for a full year the results of the researchers study are now published in the journal jama opt for natural foods in order to gain a better understanding of the factors that might drive weight gain and weight loss prof gardner and team also sequenced the participants genomes in doing so they looked for gene patterns that they could associate with the effectiveness fat or carb metabolism another test measured all the subjects insulin levels which have previously been associated with weight gain in some people cant keep the weight off this may be why why are our bodies so stubborn when it comes to weight management a new study sheds light read now for the first 8 weeks of their respective diets the participants were instructed to consume no more than 20 grams of either fats or carbs per day this the authors explain would be the equivalent of one and a half slices of wholewheat bread for carbs or a large handful of nuts in the case of fats from the second month of their diet onward the participants were allowed to make adjustments as needed adding back 5 –15 grams of either carbs or fat little by little the purpose of these adjustments was to encourage the participants to strike a nutritional balance that they would be comfortable adhering to in the long run beyond the `` confines '' of the study '' we wanted them to choose '' says prof gardner `` a lowfat or lowcarb diet plan that they could potentially follow forever rather than a diet that theyd drop when the study ended '' as the year drew to a close those who had been following a lowfat diet had a daily fat intake of 57 grams on average compared with 87 grams per day before the start of the study those on a lowcarb diet had a daily carb intake of approximately 132 grams versus 247 grams before the study started participants lost an average of 13 pounds over the 1year period the scientists were pleased with the impact that the study had on the participants dietary health stressing that one of its main achievements was to encourage them to switch to healthful sources of fats and carbs '' we made sure to tell everybody '' adds prof gardner `` regardless of which diet they were on to go to the farmers market and dont buy processed convenience food also we advised them to diet in a way that didnt make them feel hungry or deprived '' study opens the door to further questions after measuring participants baseline insulin levels and weight loss progress throughout the study the researchers saw that although they had all transitioned to more healthful eating habits there was still a lot of individual variance when it came to weight loss thus while some participants lost more than 60 pounds others gained 15–20 pounds however the researchers were unable to find any links between gene patterns or insulin output and a persons likelihood of thriving on a lowfat versus lowcarb diet '' this study closes the door on some questions but it opens the door to others we have gobs of data that we can use in secondary exploratory studies '' prof gardner notes the researchers next step from here therefore will be to look at all the different data collected throughout the current study and try to understand how individual dietary needs might be calculated in the future '' i still think there is an opportunity to discover some personalization to it now we just need to work on tying the pieces together '' says prof gardner in the meantime the researchers encourage people on a weight loss journey to just be more mindful about what they eat since that will be the first step to a more healthful lifestyle '' on both sides referring to lowcarb and lowfat dieters we heard from people who had lost the most weight that we had helped them change their relationship to food and that now they were more thoughtful about how they ate '' prof gardner concludesintermittent fasting has been gaining popularity among people looking to shed extra kilograms and maintain a healthy weight researchers argue that this type of diet may also slow down aging and disease intermittent fasting can help with weight management but might it also bring other health benefits in intermittent fasting what essentially takes place in the body is that one source of energy which can facilitate the accumulation of body fat is switched for another our bodies run on glucose or simple sugar but when we fast for a longer period of time that energy source becomes unavailable our system needs to identify a different kind of `` fuel '' that is when the body begins to convert certain types of body fat into fatty acids which are easily absorbed by the blood fatty acids in turn produce molecules called ketones which the body uses as its new source of energy stephen anton a researcher at the university of florida college of medicine in gainesville calls this process `` flipping the metabolic switch '' '' this switch '' explains anton `` can happen after a certain period of time fasting its a gradation in which your metabolism over time shifts to use higher and higher amounts of ketones for energy '' he and his team were interested to learn more about how this switch occurs and whether it could bring other health benefits alongside weight management for this purpose they reviewed numerous recent studies focused on the mechanisms and benefits of intermittent fasting the teams review published in the journal obesity suggests that intermittent fasting may be more healthful than other dieting strategies as ketones put less stress on cells than the byproducts of other dieting styles significant weight loss regardless of style anton and his colleagues explain that the switch usually begins to take place after 8–12 hours of fasting though in the case of individuals who practice intermittent fasting the fasting strategies vary the researchers focused on the two most common types of intermittent fasting diets the first of which is based on time restrictions for eating in it the dieter may fast for a number of hours per day for instance 16 hours while allowing themselves to eat anything theyd like over the remaining hours how intermittent fasting can increase weight loss how does intermittent fasting work read now for the second type of intermittent fasting dieters may choose to alternate days of total fasting with days when no food is off limits or they may simply alternate days of frugal eating when individuals limit themselves to foods that equal only about 500 calories in all with days of unrestricted eating or `` feasting days '' `` of course '' anton notes `` we recommend healthy food during the feasting times '' the teams review of existing studies revealed that all in all any type of intermittent fasting diets are associated with significant weight loss in all 10 clinical trials assessing the effects of alternateday fasting the results conclusively pointed to this strategys effectiveness when it came to shedding extra kilos and 3 out of the 4 studies focused on the restricted timing type of intermittent fasting had similar results '' so in my mind its not a question of whether it works for producing fat loss '' says anton whats more interesting and more important is what kind of tissue is lost through intermittent fasting additional potential health benefits most of the studies reviewed by anton and team revealed that while participants did lose body fat no significant amount of lean tissue which includes organ tissue muscular tissue and bone tissue was lost this is important since lean tissue allows our bodies to keep on functioning well and other types of dieting strategies anton notes lead to significant loss of both fat and lean tissue which may affect health in the long run studies into the effect of the switch from glucosedriven energy to ketonedriven energy in rodents and other animals suggests that intermittent fasting could also have other health benefits the scientists say the researchers say that it could help to prolong the lifespan improve the functioning of metabolic processes protect cognitive function enhance physical performance reduce harmful instances of inflammation and shield against cardiovascular diseases '' an important takeaway is that we all have the ability to switch our metabolism from glucose to ketone utilization and that switch has the potential to have profound health benefits for us in addition to the positive changes in body composition '' stephen anton still the authors warn against starting intermittent fasting without first asking for a doctors advice this dieting style may not be equally beneficial for everyone and in some cases it could do more harm than good he cautionsemerging evidence suggests that a `` potent '' drug could prevent the development of alzheimers disease but only if a person takes the medication long before symptoms of this condition make an appearance an existing drug may be able to stop alzheimers onset researchers say alzheimers disease is the most common form of dementia according to the centers for disease control and prevention cdc an estimated 57 million adults in the united states live with this condition unfortunately there is no cure for alzheimers and following disease onset symptoms tend to worsen progressively then the question `` can specialists prevent the disease in people deemed at increased risk '' arises the authors of a new study from the university of virginia in charlottesville suggest that one drug called memantine which is currently used to manage alzheimers symptoms may actually help prevent the disease this however might only happen if a person takes the drug before symptoms set in '' based on what weve learned so far it is my opinion that we will never be able to cure alzheimers disease by treating patients once they become symptomatic '' says prof george bloom of the university of virginia who oversaw the study '' the best hope for conquering this disease is to first recognize patients who are at risk and begin treating them prophylactically with new drugs and perhaps lifestyle adjustments that would reduce the rate at which the silent phase of the disease progresses '' he says adding `` ideally we would prevent it from starting in the first place '' the journal alzheimers dementia has now published the teams findings the cell cycle reentry process the researchers explain that alzheimers disease actually begins long before symptoms start to show perhaps even a decade or longer in advance one of the conditions characteristics is that once affected by the disease brain cells attempt to divide possibly in order to balance out the death of other neurons only to die anyway in any case the further division of fully formed brain cells is unusual and does not happen in a healthy brain the affected neurons attempt at division is called the `` cell cycle reentry process '' '' its been estimated that as much as 90 percent of neuron death that occurs in the alzheimers brain follows this cell cycle reentry process which is an abnormal attempt to divide '' explains prof bloom more potent alzheimers therapy is on its way recent advances in alzheimers research are speeding up the process of designing better therapies read now '' by the end of the course of the disease the patient will have lost about 30 percent of the neurons in the frontal lobes of the brain '' he estimates study coauthor erin kodis prof blooms former doctoral student formed her own hypothesis about what triggers this mechanism excess calcium she believes enters neurons through special receptors called nmda receptors on the cells surface this drives brain cells to start dividing following a series of laboratory experiments kodis confirmed that her hypothesis was correct this mechanism is set in motion before the formation of amyloid plaques which are characteristic of alzheimers disease in the brain eventually however molecules of an amino acid called beta amyloid stick together to form toxic amyloid plaques memantine may have potent properties kodis saw that when neurons encounter beta amyloid molecules in the early stages that precede plaque buildup nmda receptors open to receive the excess calcium that ultimately leads to their destruction but then the researcher made another discovery the drug memantine prevented cell cycle reentry by closing the nmda receptors on the surface of neurons '' the experiments suggest that memantine might have potent diseasemodifying properties if it could be administered to patients long before they have become symptomatic and diagnosed with alzheimers disease '' prof george bloom '' perhaps this could prevent the disease or slow its progression long enough that the average age of symptom onset could be significantly later if it happens at all '' prof bloom adds these findings are particularly promising memantine has few known side effects and those that have been reported are rare and do not have a major impact on an individuals wellbeing prof bloom believes that in the future a useful preventive approach might be to screen people for telling signs that they are exposed to alzheimers as early as possible specialists could then prescribe memantine to those at an increased risk of the disease he says people may have to take the drug throughout their lives to keep alzheimers at bay or at least in check '' i dont want to raise false hopes '' says prof bloom however he continues `` if this idea of using memantine as a prophylactic pans out it will be because we now understand that calcium is one of the agents that gets the disease started and we may be able to stop or slow the process if done very early '' currently prof bloom and colleagues are planning a clinical trial to test the preventive strategy that they outlined in the studyfor many cancers diagnosis is a long and challenging process a new blood test however could offer a muchneeded simpler and more effective diagnostic technique called cancerseek it has the potential to identify eight cancer types from one blood sample researchers have created a blood test that could detect eight cancer types in the new study researchers reveal how the blood test demonstrated high sensitivity and specificity for cancer detection in more than 1000 people with the disease the team from the johns hopkins university school of medicine in baltimore md recently published their results in the journal science worldwide cancer remains one of the leading causes of death it is estimated that by 2030 the number of cancer deaths will have risen from 8 million to 13 million early diagnosis is key to reducing cancerrelated deaths the earlier the disease is diagnosed the higher the chances of treatment success but sadly many cancers are not caught until the later stages and this is largely due to a lack of fast and effective diagnostic tools however the johns hopkins researchers believe that cancerseek could bring us closer to a quick simple way to detect cancer in its early stages test produced high sensitivity and specificity when cancerous tumors form they release small fragments of mutated dna and proteins into the bloodstream and these can act as markers for cancer the new blood test works by identifying the markers for 16 gene mutations and eight proteins that are associated with eight different cancer types these include breast lung and colorectal cancer as well as five cancers ovarian liver stomach pancreatic and esophageal for which there are currently no routine screening tests for people at average risk '' a novelty of our classification method is that it combines the probability of observing various dna mutations together with the levels of several proteins in order to make the final call '' explains study coauthor cristian tomasetti phd an associate professor of oncology and biostatistics at johns hopkins university how gum disease could lead to cancer researchers shed light on how gum disease can fuel cancer read now for their study the researchers tested cancerseek on 1005 individuals who had been diagnosed with nonmetastatic forms of one of the eight cancers they found that the test was able to identify 70 percent of the cancers with sensitivity ranging from 33 percent for breast cancer to 98 percent for ovarian cancer sensitivity ranged from 69 percent to 98 percent for the five cancers that currently have no routine screening tests the researchers report in terms of specificity the test yielded an overall result of more than 99 percent on testing cancerseek on 812 healthy adults it only produced seven falsepositive results as study coauthor kenneth kinzler phd codirector of the ludwig center for cancer genetics and therapeutics at johns hopkins notes `` very high specificity was essential because falsepositive results can subject patients to unnecessary invasive followup tests and procedures to confirm the presence of cancer '' what is more the researchers found that their test was able to pinpoint the location of tumors for 83 percent of patients test could substantially impact patients the researchers note that larger studies will now be needed to further determine the efficacy of cancerseek as a routine screening test for cancer and such studies are in the pipeline however the team believes that the results of its current research are encouraging '' this has the potential to substantially impact patients earlier detection provides many ways to improve outcomes for patients '' says study coauthor dr anne marie lennon phd who is an associate professor of medicine surgery and radiology at johns hopkins '' optimally cancers would be detected early enough that they could be cured by surgery alone but even cancers that are not curable by surgery alone will respond better to systemic therapies when there is less advanced disease '' she adds the team hopes that cancerseek will one day offer a simple noninvasive and fast strategy for diagnosing cancer in its early stages '' this test represents the next step in changing the focus of cancer research from late stage disease to early disease which i believe will be critical to reducing cancer deaths in the longterm '' study coauthor dr bert vogelstein johns hopkins university school of medicinethey are usually marketed as a safe alternative to conventional cigarettes but a new study suggests that ecigarettes may still pose serious harm to health researchers suggest that ecigarettes may increase the risk of cancer and heart disease researchers at the new york university school of medicine in new york city found that mice exposed to electronic cigaratte ecigarette vapor experienced dna damage in the lungs bladder and heart which could increase the risk of cancer and heart disease such damage was also found in cultured human lung and bladder cells that had been exposed to ecigarette vapor for the equivalent of 10 years study coauthor moonshong tang of the department of environmental medicine at the new york university school of medicine and his colleagues recently reported their findings in the proceedings of the national academy of sciences ecigarettes also known as ecigs have soared in popularity in recent years particularly among teenagers and young adults according to the centers for disease control and prevention cdc more than 2 million middle and high school students in the united states report having used ecigarettes in the past 30 days ecigarettes are not approved by the food and drug administration fda as a quitsmoking aid after the us preventive services task force concluded that there is `` insufficient evidence to recommend for or against their use for smoking cessation '' however research has found that more than 80 percent of smokers believe that ecigarettes could help them to quit while more than 97 percent believe that the batterypowered devices can help to reduce the use of conventional tobacco the debate over ecigarette safety when it comes to our health the cdc believe that ecigarettes are not as harmful as conventional ones still because ecigarettes are relatively new to the market precisely how harmful they are remains unclear that said we are learning more and more about the potential dangers of ecigarette use or `` vaping '' the pros and cons of ecigarettes revealed a new report details the potential benefits and risks of ecigarette use read now in 2017 medical news today reported on a study that linked the flavorings in ecigarette liquid to impaired heart muscle function a more recent report claims that there is `` substantial evidence '' that ecigarette use increases heart rate and that some chemicals in the vapor can harm dna the study by tang and team provides further evidence of the harms of ecigarettes after finding that exposure to ecigarette vapor can damage dna in a way that could cause cancer and heart disease ecigarette vapor caused dna damage the researchers came to their findings by exposing 10 male mice to ecigarette vapor containing 10 milligrams of nicotine which is comparable with what humans inhale for 3 hours per day 5 days per week for 12 weeks when compared with a control group of mice that inhaled filtered air they found that the mice exposed to ecigarette vapor showed dna damage in their heart lungs and bladder what is more the scientists found that exposure to ecigarette vapor halted dna repair processes in the lung tissue of mice they found the same outcomes when testing longterm exposure to ecigarette vapor on human lung and bladder cells in conclusion to their findings tang and colleagues write '' based on these results we propose that ecs ecigarette smoke is carcinogenic and that ecig smokers have a higher risk than nonsmokers to develop lung and bladder cancer and heart diseases '' critics of the research however claim that this study does not prove that ecigarettes are harmful to health talking to the guardian peter hajek the director of the tobacco dependence research unit at queen mary university of london in the united kingdom says that the `` study shows nothing at all about the dangers of vaping '' he continues saying `` it doesnt show that vaping causes cancer this is one in a long line of false alarms which may be putting people off the switch from smoking to vaping which would undoubtedly be of great benefit to them '' it seems that the jury is out on whether or not vaping can cause cancer and heart disease but one thing is clear more studies are needed to find outbreaking research concludes that the use of two existing drugs could successfully treat certain lung cancers the study delves deep into the molecular survival kit of lung tumors understanding how lung tumors survive and grow leads to an innovative new treatment lung cancer is now the leading cause of cancer death in the united states responsible for almost 160000 deaths each year many are driven by the kras oncogene kras is an essential gene but in its mutant form it is an important step in the generation of many types of cancer for over 30 years the kras oncogene has been a focus of research finding a way to remove its teeth would be pivotal in the treatment of a range of cancers as part of this effort rather than targeting the gene directly some scientists have focused on pathways that are related to the errant gene one pathway of interest centers on insulin and insulinlike growth factor1 igf1 this pathway helps to regulate the uptake of nutrients into the cell providing it with the energy and raw ingredients it needs to grow if the tumor cells fuel supply could be severed its onward march might be halted however it is not clear whether kras oncogenes are reliant on this particular pathway and in clinical trials results have not been encouraging in fact one study in mice found that lung tumors actually became more aggressive after the pathway was suppressed attacking krasrelated pathways undeterred a team from the boston childrens hospital in massachusetts used a fresh approach in the mouse study mentioned above the insulinigf1 signaling pathway was only partially closed off in the latest study though a genetic technique was used that shut it down entirely to do this the scientists crossed two strains of genetically modified mice the first is a wellused model for krasdriven lung cancer and the other is a mouse used to study diabetes that lacks insulinigf1 signaling in the diabetes mouse model the insulinigf1 pathway is unshackled by the deletion of two genes irs1 and irs2 these encode `` adaptor '' proteins which are essential for the smooth running of the insulinigf1 pathway '' our study uses a robust way to block insulinigf1 signaling and addresses a longstanding question in krasmutant lung cancer when you use genetics results can be more conclusive '' senior study author nada kalaany phd an assistant professor at harvard medical school boston ma using their new model the scientists demonstrated that by suppressing the two adaptor proteins insulinigf1 signaling is blocked and lung tumors are significantly suppressed '' almost all animals in this lung cancer model typically die within 15 weeks of kras activation '' says kalaany `` but the ones that lost both irs1 and irs2 were completely fine we saw almost no tumors at 10 to 15 weeks '' this finding is important because drugs that block insulinigf1 signaling are already in use and freely available the results are published this week in the proceedings of the national academy of sciences while the preliminary findings are hopeful the researchers knew that there was more work to be done cancer is a complex evermorphing disease with a terrifying knack for circumventing medical interventions outfoxing lung cancer to observe whether the cancer cells were able to navigate around this new roadblock the team let the animals live longer to see what happened next as kalaany explains `` sure enough at around 16 weeks we started seeing some tumors so then we asked how were these tumor cells able to overcome loss of irs1 and irs2 '' how lung cancer cells disguise themselves to evade chemo by adopting the traits of cells from other major organs lung cancer cells can escape chemotherapy read now the answer was found in the levels of essential cellular building blocks amino acids tumor cells lacking the adaptor proteins failed to move amino acids into their cells despite a plentiful supply outside of the cell '' growth factors like igf1 tell cells that nutrients are around '' says kalaany `` so when you suppress their signaling the tumor cells dont take up the amino acids and think they are starved '' '' but we found that the tumor cells can compensate for this and break down their own proteins to generate amino acids '' so the krasdriven tumors threw out a curve ball they had once again figured out a workaround by breaking themselves down in a process known as autophagy they can generate the raw material they need to thrive the researchers however were one step ahead heading cancer off at the pass drugs that inhibit protein breakdown are already available these include chloroquine which is currently involved in a number of cancer drug trials and bortezomib which blocks proteasomes proteindigesting structures and is already used to treat myeloma when the two prongs of the attack were combined the results were more than encouraging they found that tumor cells lacking irs1 and irs2 did not grow well and when the inhibitors were added growth stopped almost completely additional studies will now be needed to understand how these two drug types might interact in a patient however this is a considerable breakthrough and the researchers are excited to take it to the next phase '' our work tries to identify metabolic dependencies and vulnerabilities in tumors '' says kalaany `` if we identify collaborators we would love to have a clinical trial in nonsmallcell lung cancer combining igf1 inhibitors with autophagy inhibitors or proteasome inhibitors '' by testing to breaking point every part of a tumor cells survival kit researchers will one day beat cancerhigh blood pressure or hypertension is a major risk factor for heart disease the leading cause of death in the united states but a new study has found that two classes of medication that are commonly used to lower blood pressure could present a death risk all on their own researchers have identified two blood pressure drugs that could raise mortality risk scientists at the intermountain medical center heart institute in salt lake city ut found that individuals with hypertension who used alpha blockers and alpha2 agonists to control their blood pressure showed an increase in blood pressure variability which could increase mortality risk lead study author dr brian clements and team have recently presented their findings at the 2018 american college of cardiology acc scientific sessions held in orlando fl blood pressure is the force of blood that pushes against the wall of the arteries and in november last year the american heart association aha and the acc set new guidelines now a person is considered to have hypertension if their systolic blood pressure the top number is 130 millimeters of mercury mmhg or higher and their diastolic blood pressure the bottom number is 80 mmhg or higher systolic blood pressure is the force of blood against the artery walls when the heart is beating while diastolic blood pressure is the force of blood when the heart is at rest or between heartbeats the updated guidelines mean that almost half of adults in the united states have high blood pressure which puts them at greater risk of heart attack stroke and heart disease among other health problems of course when it comes to treating hypertension the goal is to lower blood pressure this may be achieved through lifestyle changes such as adopting a healthful diet and increasing physical activity medication or both previous research however has discovered that consistency is key for blood pressure levels a study published in the bmj in 2016 for example associated higher variability of systolic blood pressure with a 15 percent increase in allcause mortality according to the new study from dr clements and colleagues certain types of medication that are used to lower blood pressure may be contributing to this mortality risk two medications should be avoided for their study the researchers analyzed the data of over 10500 adults with high blood pressure the participants had their blood pressure measured at least seven times between january 2007 and december 2011 and the type of blood pressure medication they were using was monitored common blood pressure drug raises skin cancer risk researchers reveal how a blood pressure medication may increase the risk of skin cancer read now the team used these data to assess whether certain classes of blood pressure medication were associated with variability in blood pressure levels the study revealed two classes of blood pressure medication that were linked to higher blood pressure variability in subjects alpha blockers and alpha2 agonists alpha blockers which include doxazosin mesylate and prazosin hydrochloride work by dilating the blood vessels alpha2 agonists such as methyldopa work by targeting sympathetic nervous system activity thereby reducing blood vessel constriction based on the study results dr clements and colleagues say that these two medications should not be used to treat hypertension '' patients should know what their blood pressure is '' he says `` and if its up and down all the time the patient should work with their physician to explore options for the best blood pressure medications that will reduce variances '' '' where possible the two types of medications that show an increase in variances should be avoided '' dr brian clements dr clements adds that ace inhibitors angiotensin receptor blockers calcium channel blockers and thiazide diuretics may be safer treatment options for people with hypertension `` people who are on other types of blood pressure medications have an increased risk of death '' he adds however blood pressure variability is not solely down to medication dr clements notes that the way in which blood pressure is measured can have a significant effect on readings '' because of the variables that affect blood pressure measurements '' says dr clements `` finding ways to more accurately measure blood pressure can better identify effective treatments for patients who have hypertension '' for accurate blood pressure readings he recommends sitting or laying down for 15 minutes before measurements are taken avoiding stressful situations and using a wellfitting blood pressure cuff may also helpa new study reveals that individuals with higher levels of belly fat and larger waistlines are more likely to have lower vitamin d levels where fat is stored on the body may impact vitamin d levels currently in medical circles vitamin d is the talk of the town produced in our skin on contact with sunlight it plays a myriad of roles in the human body in the past few months medical news today have covered a wealth of research into the group of fatsoluble secosteroids more commonly known as vitamin d for instance recent studies have found that vitamin d might protect against heart failure diabetes and cancer and that vitamin d deficiency causes hair loss vitamin d deficiency has traditionally been linked to bone health but it may also have a role to play in respiratory tract infections and autoimmune disease among others with more than 40 percent of the population of the united states being vitamin d deficient this is a serious issue some authors have referred to it as `` an ignored epidemic '' estimating that over 1 billion people worldwide have inadequate levels vitamin d and belly fat exposed they discovered that in women both total and abdominal fat were associated with lower vitamin d levels but that abdominal fat had the greatest impact in men however lower vitamin d levels were significantly linked with fat in the liver and abdomen across both sexes more belly fat predicted lower levels of vitamin d rafiq explains `` the strong relationship between increasing amounts of abdominal fat and lower levels of vitamin d suggests that individuals with larger waistlines are at a greater risk of developing deficiency and should consider having their vitamin d levels checked '' her next step is to understand why this relationship exists does a deficiency in vitamin d cause fat to be stored in the abdominal region or does belly fat decrease levels of vitamin d it will take more work to tease apart cause and effect as rafiq explains `` due to the observational nature of this study we can not draw a conclusion on the direction or cause of the association between obesity and vitamin d levels '' '' however this strong association may point to a possible role for vitamin d in abdominal fat storage and function '' rachida rafiq the links between obesity and vitamin d deficiency are growing increasingly robust the next challenge is working out a way to effectively tackle this issuebaking soda has been used as a home remedy for generations due to its antacid properties yet its benefits run even deeper and new research may explain why it is an effective aid in the treatment of autoimmune diseases such as arthritis how can this kitchen staple change the bodys inflammatory response baking soda also called sodium bicarbonate is a kitchen staple commonly used as a raising agent for cakes that being said it has also made a name for itself as a home remedy for various conditions half a teaspoon of baking soda is often taken to ease heartburn or acid reflux for example and this substance is also used to whiten teeth in a new study whose findings are now published in the journal of immunology researchers from the medical college of georgia at augusta university reveal exactly how drinking a solution of baking soda could prime the immune system against inflammatory diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis paul oconnor a renal physiologist at augusta university and colleagues tested the effects that drinking a baking soda solution would have first on rats and then on humans their experiments tell a complex story about how this salt provides a signal to a special kind of cell called `` mesothelial cells '' telling them that the body is fine and not under attack rendering an aggressive immune system unnecessary thus harmful autoimmune responses are averted baking soda and mesothelial cells mesothelial cells line the internal organs as well as many different cavities in the body not only do they prevent organs and other internal tissue from sticking together they also serve other functions not all of which have been studied in detail in the new study oconnor and team tested the effect that a baking soda solution would have first on rats and then on healthy human participants and they noted that it influenced an intriguing mechanism can this biochemical switch off inflammation researchers may have found a way to `` switch off '' certain immune cells when necessary read now baking soda `` prompts '' the stomach to produce more gastric acid which allows it to digest food quicker and easier but in addition to this it also seems to tell the mesothelial cells that line the spleen to `` take it easy '' because there is no threat basically in oconnor words mesothelial cells learn that `` its most likely a hamburger not a bacterial infection '' so they in turn do not activate the spleens `` army '' of macrophages or white blood cells tasked with clearing up potentially harmful cellular detritus '' certainly drinking bicarbonate affects the spleen and we think its through the mesothelial cells '' oconnor explains mesothelial cells communicate with the organs they line using small projections called microvilli and the medium through which they send their message is the neurotransmitter acetylcholine from inflammatory to antiinflammatory so what actually happens the study authors note that those who drank the baking soda solution experienced a shift in the kinds of immune cells activated in the spleen in fact proinflammatory macrophages m1 dwindled in number while the levels of antiinflammatory cells m2 rose the same kinds of cells are also housed in the blood and kidneys and baking soda happens to be used in the treatment of chronic kidney disease this idea prompted the new studys authors to explore the mechanisms through which this substance might help to improve renal function '' we started thinking how does baking soda slow progression of kidney disease '' says oconnor at first the researchers analyzed the effects of the baking soda solution on a rat model of kidney disease and then again on healthy rats which acted as the control sample this is when the researchers noticed that the levels of m1 cells in the kidneys dropped while those of m2 cells increased both the rats with kidney disease and the healthy rats presented the same development and it was this shift that flagged up the notion that baking soda could influence the inflammatory response at cellular level when the researchers recruited healthy medical students and asked them to drink the baking soda solution it became apparent the antiinflammatory effect of this substance happened in the spleen as well as in the blood '' the shift from inflammatory to an antiinflammatory profile is happening everywhere we saw it in the kidneys we saw it in the spleen now we see it in the peripheral blood '' paul oconnor safe way to treat inflammatory disease one of the authors main revelations was the fact that it was the mesothelial cells that mediated the antiinflammatory signals an existing working theory had been that signals were transmitted to the relevant cells through the vagus nerve a long cranial nerve that communicates with the heart lungs and various organs in the abdomen but experiments revealed that this idea was incorrect when the scientists tried cutting off this nerve this did not affect the behavior of the mesothelial cells instead it became apparent that these cells had a more direct communication with the organs they lined than previously thought oconnor and his team became aware of this when they noted that moving the spleen affected mesothelial cells that lined it and the signals modulating the inflammatory response were lost '' we think the cholinergic acetylcholine signals that we know mediate this antiinflammatory response arent coming directly from the vagal nerve innervating the spleen but from the mesothelial cells that form these connections to the spleen '' explains oconnor the results begin to provide an answer as to why baking soda can help with autoimmune diseases including arthritis and further research into these mechanisms could help to optimize the results obtained through this common compound '' its potentially a really safe way to treat inflammatory disease '' oconnor concludesanxiety disorders are common across the united states thought to affect around 40 million adults each year however as if these feelings of worry and fear arent enough to contend with a new study suggests that older people who have worsening anxiety symptoms may be more likely to develop alzheimers disease researchers have linked increasing anxiety symptoms in older age to higher levels of a protein linked to alzheimers researchers found that increasing symptoms of anxiety were linked to higher levels of betaamyloid which is a protein associated with alzheimers disease in the brains of older people with normal cognitive functioning first study author dr nancy donovan who is a geriatric psychiatrist at brigham and womens hospital in boston ma and team say that the results suggest that a rise in the sypmtoms of anxiety could be an early sign of alzheimers the findings were recently published in the american journal of psychiatry alzheimers disease is a form of dementia characterized by problems with memory and thinking as well as changes in behavior it is estimated that around 55 million people in the us are living with alzheimers of whom around 54 million are over the age of 65 the precise causes of alzheimers disease remain unclear but scientists believe that betaamyloid plays a key role this is a protein that can form `` plaques '' which have been found to block nerve cell communication in the brains of people with alzheimers these plaques are considered to be a hallmark of the disease and research has suggested that an increase in betaamyloid levels can occur up to 10 years before the onset of alzheimers symptoms according to the new study anxiety could play a significant role in increased betaamyloid levels among older adults targeting anxiety may slow alzheimers previous studies have suggested that depression and anxiety might be indicators of alzheimers since symptoms of these mental health conditions often occur in the early stages of the disease for their study dr donovan and colleagues sought to determine whether or not betaamyloid might play a role in this association alzheimers tripleaction diabetes drug shows promise as treatment researchers reveal how a diabetes drug could help to treat alzheimers read now the research included 270 adults between age 62 and 90 with normal cognitive functioning all of whom underwent positron emission tomography at study baseline and annually during 5 years of followup in order to determine levels of betaamyloid in their brains symptoms of anxiety and depression among the adults were assessed using the 30item geriatric depression scale it was found that adults who showed an increase in anxiety symptoms over 5 years of followup also had higher levels of betaamyloid in their brains the researchers say that this indicates that worsening anxiety might be an early sign of alzheimers disease '' if further research substantiates anxiety as an early indicator it would be important for not only identifying people early on with the disease but also treating it and potentially slowing or preventing the disease process early on '' dr nancy donovan the scientists point out that followup studies are required to determine whether older adults who experience an increase in anxiety symptoms actually go on to develop alzheimersnew results could change the face of alzheimers treatment the herpes simplex virus is found to play a vital role in the condition and antiherpetic medication is shown to have a dramatic effect on dementia risk alzheimers disease may soon be treated with antiviral medication last month medical news today reported on a study that found `` strong evidence '' that viruses are involved in alzheimers disease the postmortem analyses of brain tissue found that people who lived with this dementia type also had more herpesviruses 6 and 7 than people without alzheimers now a scientific commentary suggests that the study that mnt covered is not the only one to pinpoint a link between herpes and dementia in fact three more studies have strengthened this link and the commentary recently published in the journal of alzheimers disease – takes a look at all three ruth itzhaki who is a professor of neuroscience and experimental psychology at the university of manchester in the united kingdom alongside richard lathe who is a professor in the division of infection and pathway medicine at the university of edinburgh also in the uk authored the commentary remarkable magnitude of antiviral effect the studies referenced in the commentary are two articles tsai et al 2017 and chen et al 2018 that suggest that acute herpes zoster infection puts people at a higher risk of dementia and one article that shows that aggressive treatment with antiherpetic medication drastically lowers dementia risk the latter study deemed `` most important '' by profs itzhaki and lathe examined 8362 people aged 50 and above who received a diagnosis of herpes simplex virus hsv infection as well as a control group of 25086 agematched healthy people breakthrough researchers fix alzheimers gene by correcting the faulty apoe4 gene researchers were able to erase its damaging effects on the brain read now the two groups were followed for almost a decade between 2001 and 2010 in the herpes group the risk of dementia was over 25 times higher than in the control group significantly the study also revealed that aggressive antiviral treatment reduced the relative risk of dementia by 10 times prof lathe comments on these new findings saying `` not only is the magnitude of the antiviral effect remarkable but also the fact that despite the relatively brief duration and the timing of treatment in most patients severely affected by hsv1 it appeared to prevent the longterm damage in the brain that results in alzheimers '' '' this article and two others provide the first population evidence for a causal link between herpes virus infection and alzheimers disease a hugely important finding '' prof ruth itzhaki '' i believe we are the first to realize the implications of these striking data on this devastating condition which principally affects the elderly '' prof itzhaki adds '' but '' she says `` we believe that these safe and easily available antivirals may have a strong part to play in combating the disease in these patients '' she also suggests that in the future it may be possible to prevent the disease `` by vaccination against the virus in infancy '' '' successful treatment by a specific drug or successful vaccination against the putative microbe are the only ways to prove that a microbe is the cause of a noninfectious human disease '' says prof itzhakiwith marijuana legalization on the rise an increasing number of studies are exploring the drugs potential harms and benefits however a new study suggests that when it comes to brain health alcohol is more damaging researchers say that alcohol causes more damage to the brain than marijuana does scientists at the university of colorado boulder conducted a review of existing imaging data that looked at the effects of alcohol and marijuana or cannabis on the brain their findings linked alcohol consumption with longterm changes to the structure of white matter and gray matter in the brain the use of marijuana however seemed to have no significant longterm effects on brain structure study leader rachel thayer of the department of psychology and neuroscience at the university of colorado boulder and colleagues recently reported their results in the journal addiction it is estimated that around 222 million people in the united states have used marijuana in the past month making it `` the most commonly used illicit drug '' in the country across the us however it is increasingly becoming legalized for both medicinal and recreational purposes as a result of this changing legislation researchers have been trying to find out more about how marijuana may benefit health as well as the damage that it could cause last year for example medical news today reported on a study linking marijuana use to a greater risk of psychosis in teenagers while another study claimed that the drug is `` worse than cigarettes '' for cardiovascular health on the other side of the coin researchers have found that cannabinoids which are the active compounds in marijuana could help to prevent migraine and a more recent study linked marijuana use to an increased sex drive marijuana vs alcohol which is worse for this latest study thayer and colleagues sought to learn more about how marijuana use affects the brain study coauthor kent hutchison also of the department of psychology and neuroscience notes that to date studies that have investigated this association have produced mixed results '' when you look at these studies going back years '' he explains `` you see that one study will report that marijuana use is related to a reduction in the volume of the hippocampus the next study then comes around and they say that marijuana use is related to changes in the cerebellum `` teen marijuana use may lead to bipolar symptoms later on researchers have linked marijuana use in adolescence to a greater risk of bipolar symptoms read now '' the point is that theres no consistency across all of these studies in terms of the actual brain structures '' with the aim of closing the gap on this inconsistency the researchers conducted a new analysis on existing brain imaging data they looked at how marijuana use affects white matter and gray matter in the brain and how its effects compare with another `` drug '' that we have become so accustomed to alcohol gray matter is the tissue on the brains surface that primarily consists of nerve cell bodies white matter is the deeper brain tissue that contains myelinated nerve fibers which are branches protruding from nerve cells that transmit electrical impulses to other cells and tissues the team notes that any reduction in the size of white or gray matter or a loss in their integrity can lead to impairments in brain functioning '' with alcohol weve known its bad for the brain for decades '' notes hutchison `` but for cannabis we know so little '' marijuana use had no impact the study included the brain images of 853 adults who were aged between 18 and 55 years and 439 teenagers between the ages of 14 and 18 all participants varied in their use of alcohol and marijuana the researchers found that alcohol use particularly in adults who had been drinking for many years was associated with a reduction in gray matter volume as well as a reduction in the integrity of white matter marijuana use however appeared to have no impact on the structure of gray or white matter in either teenagers or adults based on these findings the researchers believe that drinking alcohol is likely to be much more harmful to brain health than using marijuana '' while marijuana may also have some negative consequences it definitely is nowhere near the negative consequences of alcohol '' kent hutchison when it comes to the possible benefits of marijuana use however thayer and her team note that the jury is still out and further research is needed to reach some conclusionsa form of intermittent fasting known as the 168 diet helps obese individuals to lose weight and lower their blood pressure according to a new study timerestricted eating may be the key to weight loss more and more people now turn to intermittent fasting as a fast and effective way to lose weight there are different form of this diet depending on the time intervals of `` fasting '' and `` feasting '' the socalled 52 diet for instance consists of eating normally for 5 days every week and fasting for 2 days in the fasting days the dieter restricts their calorie intake to 500 or 600 per day in daily fasting or the 168 diet people eat whatever they like for 8 hours and fast for the remaining 16 a new study evaluates the benefits of this 168 pattern for obese individuals and finds that not only does the diet work but also that it helps to lower blood pressure as many as 933 million adults have obesity in the united states according to the latest data from the centers for disease control and prevention cdc thats almost 40 percent of the countrys entire population this research was led by corresponding author krista varady an associate professor of kinesiology and nutrition at the university of illinois at chicago and the findings were published in the journal nutrition and healthy aging losing weight without counting calories varady and colleagues recruited 23 obese study participants who were aged 45 years on average with an average body mass index bmi of 35 between 10 am and 6 pm the participants could eat whatever and however much they liked but they were only allowed to drink water and caloriefree drinks for the remaining 16 hours intermittent fasting may have profound health benefits some researchers say that this type of diet can also slow down aging and stave off disease read now all the study participants were followed for a period of 12 weeks and their dieting outcomes were compared with those of a previous weight loss trial of another type of intermittent fasting called `` alternate day fasting '' in alternate day fasting they can eat whatever they like for one day and fast for the following day on average when compared with the control trial those on the 168 diet consumed 350 fewer calories lost 3 percent of their weight and had lower blood pressure more specifically the systolic blood pressure of those who fasted daily dropped by an average of 7 millimeters of mercury however insulin resistance cholesterol and fat mass remained the same between the two compared groups as varady and her colleagues conclude `` these preliminary data offer promise for the use of timerestricted feeding as a weight loss technique in obese adults but longerterm largescale randomized controlled trials are required '' the studys corresponding author also comments on the significance of the findings saying `` the results we saw in this study are similar to the results weve seen in other studies on alternate day fasting '' '' but '' she adds `` one of the benefits of the 168 diet may be that it is easier for people to maintain we observed that fewer participants dropped out of this study when compared to studies on other fasting diets '' '' the takehome message from this study is that there are options for weight loss that do not include calorie counting or eliminating certain foods '' krista varady '' the 168 diet is another tool for weight loss that we now have preliminary scientific evidence to support '' varady concludes `` when it comes to weight loss people need to find what works for them because even small amounts of success can lead to improvements in metabolic health ''fish oil is hailed for its plentiful health benefits but new research suggests that the longterm consumption of fish oil or sunflower oil may increase the risk of fatty liver disease later in life researchers say that lifelong intake of fish oil or sunflower oil could raise the risk of fatty liver disease in later life by studying rats researchers found that lifelong intake of sunflower oil or fish oil led to changes in the liver that make the organ vulnerable to nonalcoholic steatohepatitis nash nash is a more serious form of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease nafld study coauthor josé luis quiles a professor of physiology working at the university of granada in spain and colleagues recently reported their findings in the journal of nutritional biochemistry it is estimated that around 20 percent of people in the united states who have nafld also have nash and the condition becomes more common with age nash is characterized by a buildup of fat in the liver which is not caused by alcohol consumption inflammation and liver cell damage the liver damage that occurs in nash can increase the risk of liver cirrhosis and liver cancer some of the key risk factors for nash include overweight and obesity high blood pressure high cholesterol and type 2 diabetes which are factors heavily influenced by diet studying how dietary fats affect the liver building on the link between diet and nash the new study from prof quiles and his colleagues suggests that the type of oils we consume could play a role in our laterlife risk of the condition the researchers came to their findings by analyzing the effects of different dietary fats including sunflower oil fish oil and virgin olive oil on rat livers in detail the team looked at how lifelong intake of each of these oils impacted the structure of the rodents livers as well as their effects on gene expression liver fibrosis or scarring oxidative stress and the length of telomeres kiwi compound may prevent nonalcoholic fatty liver disease research suggests that nafld could be prevented with a compound found in kiwi read now oxidative stress is defined as an imbalance between free radicals which are molecules that can damage cells and the bodys ability to `` deoxidize '' these molecules and prevent their harmful effects telomeres are `` caps '' at the end of each strand of dna and they protect our chromosomes the shorter our telomeres the greater the damage to our cells research has shown that a reduction in telomere length plays a key role in cellular aging and agerelated disease telomeres that are too long however can increase the risk of cancer additionally the team looked at how the liver evolves with age as a result of the different dietary fats consumed olive oil best for a healthy liver the researchers not only found that liver fat accumulates with age but they also revealed that the type of fat that builds up on the liver is influenced by the type of fats that we eat as prof quiles points out `` this means that regardless of this accumulation some livers age in a healthier way than others and with a greater or lesser predisposition to certain diseases '' the study revealed that fish oil and sunflower oil negatively impacted the liver health of the rats lifelong sunflower oil intake was found to trigger liver fibrosis and it also altered the structure of the organ led to changes in gene expression and increased oxidation in liver cells rats that had a lifelong intake of fish oil demonstrated an increase in agerelated cell oxidation in their livers the team reports and they also experienced a decrease in electron transport chain activity in the mitochondria the `` powerhouses '' of the cell which impairs cell function fish oil also led to an increase in relative telomere length in the liver the researchers report olive oil however was found to cause the least damage to the liver taken together the team says these findings indicate that virgin olive oil might be the best dietary fat for laterlife liver health '' the alterations caused by the longterm consumption of sunflower and fish oils make the liver susceptible to nonalcoholic steatohepatitis a very serious disease that may act as a catalyst for other liver diseases such as cirrhosis and liver cancer we believe that this study will be very useful in preventing and treating diverse liver diseases '' prof josé luis quiles '' virgin olive oil is the healthiest option '' he adds `` which has already been proven in relation to diverse aspects of health '' these findings may come as a surprise fish oil is the most commonly used natural product in the us due to its frequently documented health benefits still this latest study certainly provides some food for thought when it comes to choosing which fats to include in the dietpopular belief has it and even some governmental authorities on nutrition agree that we should avoid fullfat dairy products due to their high content of saturated fats but a new study boldly challenges these claims fullfat dairy products may actually be good for cardiovascular health wholefat dairy does not raise cardiovascular risk conversely some fats present in certain dairy products might even keep stroke and heart disease at bay this is the main takeaway of a recent study led by dr dariush mozaffarian from the friedman school of nutrition science and policy at tufts university in boston ma with their findings dr mozaffarian and team challenge not only popular opinions but also the stance of governmental organizations such as the united states department of agriculture usda and the us department of health human services the two bodies advise people to avoid fullfat dairy due to its impact on cholesterol levels the saturated fats found in wholefat dairy products warn the usda raise levels of lowdensity lipoprotein ldl cholesterol also known as the `` bad '' kind of cholesterol in time high ldl cholesterol may lead to cardiovascular conditions such as atherosclerosis or coronary artery disease however the new study turns the idea that fullfat dairy is bad for you on its head the surprising findings were published in the american journal of clinical nutrition marcia otto who is an assistant professor in the department of epidemiology human genetics and environmental sciences at the university of texas health science center at houston is the first and corresponding author of the paper dairy fat may prevent heart disease stroke to study the effect of dairy on mortality risk and cardiovascular health dr mozaffarian and team examined over 2900 us seniors aged 65 and above the researchers measured the participants blood plasma levels of three fatty acids contained by dairy products at the beginning of the study in 1992 6 years later and then 13 years later associations with `` total mortality causespecific mortality and cardiovascular disease cvd risk '' were examined these four foods are proven to lower your cholesterol the `` portfolio diet '' has been proved to keep the heart healthy by several studies read now during the 22year followup period 2428 of the participants died of these deaths 833 were due to heart disease however none of the three fatty acids examined correlated with the risk of total mortality in fact high circulating levels of heptadecanoic fatty acid were associated with a lower risk of death from heart disease also adults with higher levels of fatty acids overall were 42 percent less likely to die from stroke revealed the analysis dietary guidelines should be revised according to the studys corresponding author the findings suggest that current dietary guidelines need to be amended the 2015–2020 dietary guidelines for americans issued by the office of disease prevention and health promotion recommend the consumption of `` fatfree and lowfat 1 percent dairy including milk yogurt cheese or fortified soy beverages commonly known as soymilk '' however otto disagrees `` consistent with previous findings '' she says `` our results highlight the need to revisit current dietary guidance on whole fat dairy foods which are rich sources of nutrients such as calcium and potassium '' '' these are essential for health not only during childhood but throughout life particularly also in later years when undernourishment and conditions like osteoporosis are more common '' adds the researcher '' dairy fat contrary to popular belief does not increase the risk of heart disease or overall mortality in older adults in addition the results suggest that one fatty acid present in dairy may lower risk of death from cardiovascular disease particularly from stroke '' marcia otto she adds `` consumers have been exposed to so much different and conflicting information about diet particularly in relation to fats '' and she highlights the fact that `` a growing body of evidence '' suggests that dairy fat is actually good for you '' its important to have robust studies so people can make more balanced and informed choices based on scientific fact rather than hearsay '' otto concludesa new study looking at blood stem cells uncovered fresh details surrounding the mechanisms by which alcohol raises the risk of developing cancer a new study unearths the details of cancers relationship with alcohol alcohol is known to raise the risk of no fewer than seven types of cancer these are mouth upper throat pharynx voice box laryngeal esophageal breast liver and bowel cancer though the links are established exactly how alcohol works to induce malignancy is not as wellunderstood several mechanisms are thought to be at work most previous studies have only examined cells in the laboratory looking at changes in them after exposure to alcohol ethanol recently researchers from mrc laboratory of molecular biology in cambridge united kingdom set out to gain a clearer picture of the alcoholcancer relationship using whole animals their study which was funded by cancer research uk is published this week in the journal nature acetaldehyde and blood stem cells the team fed diluted ethanol to mice and then used chromosome analysis and dna sequencing to measure any damage caused by acetaldehyde a chemical produced when alcohol is processed they focused their attention on a specific cell type blood stem cells blood stem cells found in blood and bone marrow are immature blood cells that can develop into any type of blood cell including white blood cells platelets and red blood cells it is important to understand how alcohol damages these cells as faulty stem cells are known to cause cancer as alcohol is broken down in the gut bacteria convert it into large quantities of acetaldehyde a chemical that has previously been shown to cause cancer in animals even light drinkers at risk of cancer a recent statement from the american society of clinical oncology outlines the dangers of alcohol read now following the analysis the researchers found that acetaldehyde could in fact damage and break dna within blood stem cells chromosomes became rearranged and the dna sequence was permanently changed in stem cells lead study author prof ketan patel says `` some cancers develop due to dna damage in stem cells while some damage occurs by chance our findings suggest that drinking alcohol can increase the risk of this damage '' selfdefense mechanisms alongside new insights into the damage that ethanol causes to stem cells the scientists uncovered new information about the protective mechanisms employed by our bodies in response to alcohol enzymes called aldehyde dehydrogenases aldhs form the first line of defense against alcoholrelated damage aldhs break alcohol down into acetate `` which our cells can use as a source of energy '' millions of people many east asians for instance have low levels of aldh or faulty copies of the enzymes this means that toxic acetaldehyde builds up in the body these individuals will experience telltale flushed cheeks and potentially feel ill when the researchers investigated mice without aldh they found that alcohol caused four times as much damage to dna when compared with mice that could produce aldh beyond aldh the body has a range of other secondary mechanisms that can repair various types of dna damage but these mechanisms do not always work some people have mutations that render them ineffective '' our study highlights that not being able to process alcohol effectively can lead to an even higher risk of alcoholrelated dna damage and therefore certain cancers '' prof ketan patel '' but '' he continues `` its important to remember that alcohol clearance and dna repair systems are not perfect and alcohol can still cause cancer in different ways even in people whose defense mechanisms are intact '' alcohol is known to give rise to cancer and studies such as this help us to understand why and will eventually help to prevent or slow alcoholrelated cancers as prof linda bauld from cancer research uk says `` this thoughtprovoking research highlights the damage alcohol can do to our cells costing some people more than just a hangover ''it was previously believed that fructose which is the sugar found in fruit and fruit juice is processed by the liver however a new study suggests that fructose is mainly processed in the small intestine researchers reveal that fructose is primarily processed in the small intestine not the liver the study which is published in the journal cell metabolism reveals that processed highsugar food and drink only spills over into the liver for processing when the small intestine becomes overwhelmed the recent findings add to the body of scientific knowledge on the effects of too much fructose on the body we know from previous research that excessive consumption of sugar is harmful to the liver and that chronic overconsumption causes obesity increases resistance to insulin and creates conditions for the onset of diabetes last year medical news today reported on a study that found that fructosecontaining products such as sweetened drinks can increase the risk of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis a form of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease `` which can lead to cirrhosis or liver cancer '' study observed fructose digestion in mice the researchers from princeton university in new jersey used mice to study how fructose travels through the digestive system their findings suggest that there is a physiological difference in how the body processes different amounts of sugar rather than the liver processing all the sugar in the body the team observed that more than 90 percent of fructose was processed in the small intestines of the mice in the study the team found that fructose not absorbed into the small intestine is passed through to the colon where it comes into contact with the microbiome which is the microbiotic flora that inhabits the large intestine and colon fruit juices and smoothies have unacceptably high sugar content researchers reveal that a childs entire daily sugar allowance could be in one serving of fruit juice read now the researchers explain that the microbiome is not designed to process sugar so while a person could eat a large amount of carbohydrates without exposing their microbiome to any sugar this changes significantly when highsugar products such as soda and juice are consumed while the findings do not prove that fructose influences the microbiome the team believes that `` an effect is likely '' they suggest that this link should be further investigated in future studies as it may provide new insights into the adverse effects of high sugar intake eat sugar only after meals in the study the small intestine was found to clear fructose more efficiently after a meal the team theorizes that during periods of fasting such as in the morning or midafternoon individuals may be more vulnerable to fructose as the small intestine has reduced ability to process it during these times as study author joshua d rabinowitz of the lewissigler institute for integrative genomics at princeton university explains `` we can offer some reassurance at least from these animal studies that fructose from moderate amounts of fruits will not reach the liver '' '' we saw that feeding of the mice prior to the sugar exposure enhanced the small intestines ability to process fructose '' rabinowitz continues `` and that protected the liver and the microbiome from sugar exposure '' rabinowitz says that the results support `` the most oldfashioned advice in the world '' which is to `` limit sweets to moderate quantities after meals '' and avoid sugary drinks outside of meal timesit is known that being overweight or obese leads to poor health but it may be less known that abdominal fat is the most harmful type until now researchers were unsure of the mechanisms responsible for this but now they reveal how an enzyme produced by our liver raises the risk of diabetes inflammation in the fat around the belly is particularly harmful and new research reveals why when it comes to the harmful consequences of excess fat the way it is distributed across the body is key medical news today have recently reported on studies showing that abdominal fat is deeply tied to type 2 diabetes and heart disease we have also covered studies suggesting that women in particular could be at an increased cardiometabolic risk if they have a higher waisttohip ratio additional research has found that belly fat is particularly dangerous when inflamed older studies have shown that local inflammation in the adipose tissue leads to cardiometabolic abnormalities such as insulin resistance but the exact mechanism responsible for this connection between adipose tissue inflammation and cardiometabolic disorders has remained somewhat unclear for instance researchers have wondered whether the inflammation is `` a cause or a consequence of insulin resistance '' now researchers at columbia university irving medical center in new york city ny help to shed some muchneeded light on the issue they reveal that the liver contributes to this inflammation the team was led by dr ira tabas who is the richard j stock professor of medicine at columbia university vagelos college of physicians and surgeons and the findings were published in the journal nature the key role of dpp4 inhibitors in diabetes dr tabas and his colleagues used obese mice to test whether blocking an enzyme called dpp4 would lower the inflammation in their abdominal fat the researchers focused on dpp4 because humans who already have diabetes are prescribed dpp4 inhibitors to help them manage their symptoms dpp4 inhibitors work by preventing the enzyme from interacting with an insulinboosting hormone lowcalorie sweeteners may promote metabolic syndrome people with metabolic syndrome are much more likely to develop diabetes to prevent it new research suggests that these people should avoid artificial sweeteners read now in this study dpp4 did not lower abdominal inflammation in mice dr tabas explains these findings suggesting that they may be down to the difference between how dpp4 inhibitors work in the gut versus how they work in the liver '' dpp4 inhibitors lower blood sugar by inhibiting dpp4 in the gut but we have some evidence that dpp4 inhibitors in the gut also end up promoting inflammation in fat '' he states `` that cancels out the antiinflammatory effects the drugs may have when they reach inflammatory cells called macrophages in the fat '' '' from our studies '' adds dr tabas `` we know that dpp4 interacts with a molecule on these cells to increase inflammation if we could block that interaction we might be able stop the enzyme from causing inflammation and insulin resistance '' so the researchers targeted dpp4 in the liver cells instead of the gut this reduced adipose inflammation and lowered insulin resistance dpp4 inhibitors also decreased blood sugar toward human clinical trials as dr tabas reports `` inhibiting dpp4 specifically in liver cells attacks insulin resistance the core problem of type 2 diabetes at least in our preclinical models '' the researchers explain what the findings mean for future treatments of type 2 diabetes dr tabas says `` if we can develop ways to target liver dpp4 in people this may be a powerful new way to treat obesityinduced type 2 diabetes '' dr ahmed a hasan a medical officer and program director in the atherothrombosis coronary artery disease branch of the national heart lung and blood institute also comments on the findings he says `` this study reveals a potential new target for the treatment of type 2 diabetes and cardiometabolic disorders '' '' these findings may pave the way for a future clinical trial to test whether a new treatment approach based on this target could improve insulin resistance in diabetic patients more research is needed '' dr ahmed a hasanby finding a link to a condition that raises the risk of type 2 diabetes new research questions the health benefits of ketogenic diets is there a link between diabetes and the keto diet ketogenic diets are lowcarbohydrate highfat diets that have been shown to reduce weight they change metabolism so that energy comes from fat instead of sugar when researchers in switzlerland examined what happened to mice in the early stages of a ketogenic diet they found that the animals showed a poorer ability to regulate blood sugar compared with similar mice on a highfat highcarbohydrate diet in a paper on their work now published in the journal of physiology they note that `` even though keto dietfed animals appear healthy in the fasted state they exhibit decreased glucose tolerance to a greater extent than highfat dietfed animals '' the reason for this they found was that the livers of the keto dietfed mice were not responding as well to insulin this condition which is known as insulin resistance raises the risk of developing type 2 diabetes '' diabetes is one of the biggest health issues we face '' says study author christian wolfrum who is with the institute of food nutrition and health at eth zürich in switzerland insulin resistance insulin is a hormone that helps the body control levels of blood sugar or glucose if blood sugar stays above normal for long periods of time it becomes a condition called hyperglycemia that can lead to serious health problems this is the hallmark of diabetes in type 1 diabetes hyperglycemia develops because the pancreas does not make enough insulin in type 2 diabetes organs and tissues lose their ability to respond to insulin the pancreas tries to compensate by making more insulin but eventually this is not enough and leads to hyperglycemia normal blood sugar levels may not be so normal after all researchers have found that `` normal '' levels of blood glucose often mask spikes that are considerably higher than what is considered healthy read now there are a number of ways in which insulin helps control blood glucose levels one is by signaling to the liver to reduce glucose production and another is by helping muscles and tissues absorb glucose and convert it into energy insulin resistance is a `` complex metabolic disorder '' with no obvious single cause the liver becomes insulin resistant when it fails to reduce glucose production in response to insulin cells can also become insulin resistant when they need increasing amounts of the hormone to help them use glucose however the researchers found that the main reason for decreased glucose tolerance in the keto dietfed mice was due to insulin resistance in the liver `` rather than impaired glucose clearance and tissue glucose uptake '' despite extensive research into the causes of insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes they are not completely understood one thing that scientists do know is that fatlike substances called lipids are `` clearly associated with insulin resistance '' even here however many questions remain such as `` is the link due to circulating fats or to fat buildup in tissue '' ketogenic diets and ketosis by dramatically reducing intake of carbohydrates keto diets induce a metabolic state known as ketosis in this state cells that would normally get their energy from glucose switch to ketones the lack of carbohydrates makes the body break down fats into fatty acids and then into ketones keto diets are probably among the `` most studied '' approaches to weight loss of recent times a lot of research now backs the idea that keto diets have a sound `` physiological and biochemical basis '' and can significantly benefit cardiovascular health this is welcome news to many physicians for whom one of the biggest challenges that they face in their daily practices is treating obesity however while keto diets have a proven track record in tackling obesity some concerns remain many of these likely relate to a `` broad lack of knowledge about the physiological mechanisms involved '' mechanisms of insulin resistance not clear the new study helps plug some of this knowledge gap it suggests that insulin resistance in the liver can develop in the early stages of keto diets this now needs to be confirmed in humans also the underlying mechanisms that lead to insulin resistance are still unclear especially in relation to different diets this also needs to be explored further say the researchers another area that needs further research is the effect on the brain of the byproducts of fatty acid breakdown the researchers theory is that the fatty acid byproducts might have important `` signaling roles '' in the brain '' although ketogenic diets are known to be healthy our findings indicate that there may be an increased risk of insulin resistance with this type of diet that may lead to type 2 diabetes '' christian wolfrumby probing the effect that vitamin d3 has on the cells that make up the lining of blood vessels scientists at ohio university in athens oh have identified for the first time the role that the `` sunshine vitamin '' plays in preserving cardiovascular health the sunshine vitamin has been shown to preserve heart health in a paper published in the international journal of nanomedicine they describe how they used nanosensors and a cell model to identify the molecular mechanisms that vitamin d3 can trigger in the endothelium which is the thin layer of tissue that lines blood vessels it was previously believed that the endothelium served no other purpose than to act as an inert `` wrapper '' of the vascular system allowing both water and electrolytes to pass in and out of the bloodstream however advances over the past 30 years have revealed that the endothelium acts more like an organ that lines the whole of the circulatory system from the `` heart to the smallest capillaries '' and whose cells carry out many unique biological functions changes to the endothelium have been linked to several serious health problems including high blood pressure insulin resistance diabetes tumor growth virus infections and atherosclerosis which is a condition wherein fatty deposits can build up inside arteries and increase the risk of heart attack and stroke vitamin d3 has role beyond bone health the new study suggests that vitamin d3 a version of vitamin d that our bodies produce naturally when we expose our skin to the sun plays a key role in preserving and restoring the damage to the endothelium that occurs in these diseases some other natural sources of vitamin d3 include egg yolks and oily fish it is also obtainable in the form of supplements vitamin d3 is already wellknown for its role in bone health '' however '' explains senior author tadeusz malinski a professor in the department of chemistry and biochemistry `` in recent years in clinical settings people recognize that many patients who have a heart attack will have a deficiency of d3 '' '' it doesnt mean that the deficiency caused the heart attack '' he adds `` but it increased the risk of heart attack '' nanosensors probed effect of d3 on cells for their study prof malinski and colleagues developed a measuring system using nanosensors or tiny probes that are 1000 times smaller than the thickness of human hair and can operate at the level of atoms and molecules they used the nanosensors to track the impact of vitamin d3 on molecular mechanisms in human endothelial cells that had been treated to show the same type of damage that occurs from high blood pressure blood vessel discovery may prevent diabetes a new microscopy technique reveals that the transport of insulin across the endothelium differs to that suggested previously read now the findings suggest that vitamin d3 is a powerful trigger of nitric oxide which is a molecule that plays an important signaling role in the control of blood flow and the formation of blood clots in blood vessels the researchers also found that vitamin d3 significantly reduces oxidative stress in the vascular system they note that their study `` provides direct molecular insight to previously published observations that have suggested that vitamin d3 deficiencyinduced hypertension is associated with vascular oxidative stress '' the effects of vitamin d3 were similar in both caucasian and african american endothelial cells could d3 reverse cardiovascular damage the study authors note that while their findings came from tests performed on a cellular model of high blood pressure `` the implications of the influence of vitamin d3 on dysfunctional endothelium is much broader '' they suggest that vitamin d3 has the potential to significantly reverse the damage that high blood pressure diabetes atherosclerosis and other diseases inflict on the cardiovascular system '' there are not many '' prof malinski adds `` if any known systems which can be used to restore cardiovascular endothelial cells which are already damaged and vitamin d3 can do it '' '' this is a very inexpensive solution to repair the cardiovascular system we dont have to develop a new drug we already have it '' prof tadeusz malinskisome people find it harder to lose weight than others but why is this a new study has identified a molecule in fat cells that could be to blame researchers have uncovered one reason why some people may find it hard to lose weight researchers found that the fat cells of people who are obese show higher expression of a molecule called lysyl oxidase lox lox is associated with fibrosis or `` scarring '' of fat tissue which as previous research has shown can hamper weight loss efforts study coauthor dr katarina kos who works in the diabetes and obesity research group at the university of exeter medical school in the united kingdom and colleagues recently reported their findings in the journal metabolism it is thought that around 1 in 3 adults in the united states are obese which puts them at increased risk of type 2 diabetes stroke heart disease and some forms of cancer a lack of exercise and a poor diet are the primary causes of obesity so its no surprise that eating a healthful diet and increasing physical activity are the first strategies we try in an attempt to shed the pounds but these interventions can produce mixed results some individuals see the pounds fall off while others find it much more challenging the new study may have uncovered one explanation for the latter higher lox levels in people who are obese for their study dr kos and colleagues analyzed samples of abdominal fat tissue that had been taken from obese individuals before they underwent weight loss surgery compared with abdominal fat tissue samples of leaner subjects the analysis revealed that the fat tissue of obese people had greater expression of the lox molecule which is a cause of fat tissue fibrosis on further investigation the researchers found that the increase in lox expression was driven by an increase in oxygen deprivation and inflammation in fat cells which occurs when fat cells become larger weight loss breakthrough sunlight is key researchers suggest that lack of sunlight may be to blame for winter weight gain read now the scientists explain that when fat cells undergo this type of stress they lose their ability to store excess calories as a result these calories become stored as fat around important organs such as the liver and heart and this is associated with numerous health problems including heart disease and type 2 diabetes unfortunately studies have shown that fat tissue fibrosis can make it harder for individuals to lose weight `` but this does not mean that scarring makes weight loss impossible '' dr kos emphasizes '' adding some regular activity to a somewhat reduced energy intake for a longer period makes weight loss possible and helps the fat tissue not to become further overworked '' she continues `` we know that doing this improves our blood sugar and is key in the management of diabetes '' we need to look after our fat what is more the teams findings indicate that targeting the lox molecule could be one way to prevent fat cell fibrosis and possibly make weight loss easier but more studies are needed to confirm this theory dr kos notes that further research is also needed in order to identify other ways to prevent fat tissue fibrosis in the meantime she says that increasing our physical activity could help '' there is evidence that once fat tissue becomes scarred despite weight loss it may not recover fully '' she says `` we need to look after our fat tissue which can cease to cope if it is overworked when being forced to absorb more and more calories '' '' as a clinician '' dr kos concludes `` i would advise exercise or at least a walk after a meal which can make a great difference to our metabolic health ''its likely that we all enjoy a hot cup of tea or herbal infusion at least from time to time if not on a daily basis but what are the most important health benefits that some of these soothing teas can bring us read on to learn more about the top teas for our health some teas and herbal infusions have long been appreciated for their alleged health benefits but what does research have to say '' tea began as a medicine and grew into a beverage '' writes 19thcentury japanese scholar okakura kakuzo in his infamous publication the book of tea in it he speaks at length about the history of tea and the philosophy of the traditional japanese tea ceremony kakuzo was correct modern research about the history of teadrinking in the world confirms that this beverage was originally consumed less for pleasure or as a mindfulness aid calling for the drinker to take slow sips and be in the moment instead as shown by prof victor henry mair from the university of pennsylvania in philadelphia in the true history of tea early in its history the tea plant camellia sinensis became popular for its medicinal properties the tea plants main varieties camellia sinensis sinensis and camellia sinensis assamica are responsible for most of the tea brews that we are accustomed to black tea green tea white tea and oolong tea there are many other types of teas and infusions using various other plants such as aspalathus linearis which is better known as `` rooibos '' or `` redbush '' in this spotlight well give you an overview of the top five teas that can benefit your health 1 green tea a favorite with tea drinkers everywhere green tea has been praised for its medicinal properties for years some recent studies have now confirmed some of these benefits suggesting that green tea may protect various aspects of our health green tea can increase cognitive functioning to begin with this beverage has been found to enhance cognitive functioning with one study connecting it to better working memory the type of we use on a daytoday basis researchers from the university hospital of basel in switzerland found that healthy people who agreed to consume a soft drink containing 275 grams of green tea extract exhibited more intense activity in brain areas linked to working memory therefore participants who had ingested the green tea extract had better connectivity between the frontal and parietal lobes of the brain which are two regions involved in aspects of learning memory processes and decisionmaking the health benefits brought about by green tea have been linked with their content of polyphenols which are micronutrients with antioxidant properties as antioxidants these substances can protect against the action of free radicals which induce the type of cellular damage consistent with aging a 2017 study that was published in the journal of the american chemical society found that one such polyphenol found in green tea called epigallocatechin gallate may lower the risk of alzheimers disease by interacting with the `` building blocks '' that form betaamyloid plaques a buildup of these plaques in the brain is typical of this condition and impairs brain cell signaling epigallocatechin gallate this study suggests could stop betaamyloid from forming into plaques potentially helping to keep alzheimers at bay this same green tea polyphenol has also been said to slow down the growth of tumor cells of certain types of cancer such as pancreatic cancer research that was led by the los angeles biomedical research institute in california has shown that epigallocatechin gallate can disrupt the metabolism of pancreatic cancer cells thereby impairing their growth 2 jasmine tea what we refer to as `` jasmine tea '' is a type of beverage that usually has green tea at its base to which jasmine flowers are added for an enriched aroma jasmine tea is an important component of the diet of one of the longestliving populations in the world but the benefits of jasmine tea arent solely due to the antioxidant effects of the tea plant since jasmine blooms also bring their own medicinal properties to the mix in the book ikigai the japanese secret to a long and happy life authors héctor garcía and francesc miralles note that the inhabitants of a healthy longlived community in the okinawa prefecture of japan are avid drinkers of sanpincha a special blend of green tea and jasmine '' okinawans drink more sanpincha a mix of green tea and jasmine flowers than any other kind of tea '' they write suggesting that this blend may play a role in keeping the inhabitants of okinawa healthy and mentally agile well into old age this may be because like the tea plant jasmine flowers contain antioxidants which may protect cells from agerelated damage what are the best foods to fight aging read about the top five foods that will help you to stay young in body and mind read now jasmine itself has been linked with improved physical wellbeing and is said to reduce the impact of stress that is why some researchers have experimented with compounds derived from this plant in the search of better therapies for instance prof eliezer flescher from tel aviv university in israel noticed that methyl jasmonate which is a compound obtained from jasmonic acid found in the jasmine plant induces the death of cervical cancer cells and if you happen to enjoy drinking jasmine tea simply because you love the way it smells theres actually a good reason for that research that was published in the european journal of applied physiology explained that the smell of jasmine tea is soothing able to calm nerves and able to help regulate mood 3 rooibos tea another type of tea with antioxidant properties is rooibos or `` redbush tea '' which is prepared from the aspalathus linearis plant native to south africa rooibos tea may protect liver health research has suggested that the antioxidant effects of rooibos are similar to if not quite as strong as those of green tea a recent study on the rat model has suggested that the antioxidants in rooibos tea may protect the liver from oxidative stress helping to render this organ more resilient to induced damage the researchers who conducted the study noted that their findings suggest that rooibos tea or rooibosderived dietary supplements may offer a useful health boost '' results from this study suggest that the daily intake of unfermented rooibos herbal tea or a derived commercial rooibos supplement may benefit human health by providing the liver with an enhanced antioxidant capacity to reduce damage induced by toxicants '' moreover rooibos has also been cited as helpful in lowering blood pressure and relaxing tense muscles suggesting that the active ingredient in this instance might be one of the flavonoids pigments that it contains chrysoeriol unlike green or black tea rooibos does not contain any caffeine so it wont have the same stimulating effects this makes it safe to drink well into the evening 4 hibiscus tea those of you who enjoy the refreshing taste of a more sour brew may also be familiar with herbal infusions of hibiscus a plant whose flowers can be used not just to make invigorating beverages but also to give a subtle `` punch '' to salads or as an elegant garnish for sophisticated dishes hibiscus tea is an antioxidant and may bring cardiovascular benefits the most commonly used variety is hibiscus sabdariffa also known as the `` roselle '' for the tea or more correctly `` tisane '' herbal tea its calyces are typically used although other parts of the plant such as the leaves seeds and roots are safe for consumption studies have suggested that extracts from the hibiscus calyx and hibiscus leaves have antioxidant and antitumoral effects therefore they may protect against the aging action of free radicals at a cellular level as well as fight certain types of leukemia cells hibiscus tea has also been tied to cardiovascular benefits helping to regulate systolic and diastolic blood pressure that is blood pressure during and inbetween heart beats respectively though not so commonly used to brew tea hibiscus leaves have also been linked repeatedly to a wide array of health benefits thus the polyphenols in hibiscus leaves may help to induce tumor cell death in skin cancer according to a 2015 study another study from the same year also argued that hibiscus leaf extracts could inhibit the action of prostate cancer cells 5 lemon verbena tea another herbal tea whose medicinal properties are getting increasingly recognized is that made out of lemon verbena scientifically dubbed aloysia citrodora infusions with lemon verbena are said to help with weight management it is the citrusflavored cousin of a betterknown plant that has been used in herbal infusions for years verbena or vervain verbena officinalis infusions made with lemon verbena are great for those who like me prefer a subtler citrusy aroma in their hot drinks rather than the strong lemony flavor of commonly commercialized citrus tea blends the first time that i came upon this plant sold as a tisane herb was in a local organic shop that was selling it as `` weight loss tea '' in fact studies have shown that the polyphenols in this plant can decrease the formation of fatty acids marking its potential use in the treatment of obesityrelated health issues researchers have also suggested that lemon verbena extracts may help to lower inflammatory markers levels in the blood of some people with multiple sclerosis '' results demonstrate that supplementation with lemon verbena extracts may affect the cytokine inflammation markers profile depending on the clinical subtype '' the study authors conclude having a cup of your tea or tisane of choice may be a pleasant way to carve out some selfindulgence time and stimulate your bodily and mental wellbeing in a subtle way but always keep in mind that as the saying goes `` one swallow does not a summer make '' and the most potent health benefits are best reaped by leading a healthful wholesome lifestyle we picked linked items based on the quality of products and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you we partner with some of the companies that sell these products which means healthline uk and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a links aboveheart disease is still the number one killer in the united states in this spotlight we outline 16 foods that when consumed as part of a wellrounded diet might help to keep your heart healthy how can you improve your heart health with food there are many things you can do to help keep your heart healthy and diseasefree you can schedule an annual checkup exercise daily quit smoking or take steps to reduce the level of stress in your life all of these things can have a positive effect on heart health but one of the simplest lifestyle changes that will benefit your heart is watching what you eat nearly 6 million people are currently living with heart failure and around half of these will die within 5 years of being diagnosed the centers for disease control and prevention cdc warn that eating foods high in fat cholesterol or sodium can be very bad for the heart so when taking steps to minimize the risk of heart disease diet is a good place to start in this article we examine some of the best foods for ensuring that you keep a robust and healthy heart 1 asparagus asparagus is a natural source of folate which helps to prevent an amino acid called homocysteine from building up in the body high homocysteine levels have been linked with an increased risk of heartrelated conditions such as coronary artery disease and stroke 2 beans peas chickpeas and lentils beans peas chickpeas and lentils otherwise known as pulses or legumes can all significantly reduce levels of lowdensity lipoprotein ldl or `` bad cholesterol '' they are also packed with fiber protein and antioxidant polyphenols all of which have beneficial effects on the heart and general health 3 berries berries are also full of antioxidant polyphenols which help to reduce heart disease risk berries are a great source of fiber folate iron calcium vitamin a and vitamin c and they are low in fat 4 broccoli some studies suggest that regularly eating steamed broccoli can lower cholesterol levels and prevent heart disease 5 chia seeds and flaxseeds these seeds are a rich plantbased source of omega3 fatty acids such as alphalinolenic acid omega3s have many beneficial effects such as helping to lower levels of triglycerides ldl and total cholesterol they also reduce blood pressure and minimize the buildup of fatty plaques in the arteries omega3s decrease the risk of disorders that can lead to heart attack such as thrombosis and arrhythmias 6 dark chocolate dark chocolate is a rare example of a food that tastes amazing and is good for you in moderation dark chocolate delicious and hearthealthy scientists now believe that dark chocolate has protective benefits against atherosclerosis which is when plaque builds up inside the arteries increasing risk of heart attack and stroke dark chocolate seems to prevent two of the mechanisms implicated in atherosclerosis stiffness of the arteries and white blood cell adhesion which is when white blood cells stick to the walls of blood vessels what is more studies have found that increasing dark chocolates flavanol content which is the compound that makes it tasty and moreish does not diminish these protective benefits 7 coffee also in the `` almost too good to be true '' camp is coffee one recent study found that regularly drinking coffee was linked with a decreased risk of developing heart failure and stroke however it is important to bear in mind that this study which used machine learning to assess data from the framingham heart study can only observe an association between factors and can not conclusively identify cause and effect could coffee stop clogged arteries consuming more than three cups of coffee every day may lower the risk of atherosclerosis read now 8 fish high in omega3s fish is a strong source of hearthelping omega3 fatty acids and protein but it is low in saturated fat people who have heart disease or are at risk of developing it are often recommended to increase their intake of omega3s by eating fish this is because they lower the risk of abnormal heartbeats and slow the growth of plaque in the arteries according to the american heart association aha we should eat a 35ounce serving of fatty fish such as salmon mackerel herring lake trout sardines or albacore tuna at least twice per week 9 green tea a 2011 systematic review found that drinking green tea is associated with a small reduction in cholesterol which as we know is a main contributor to heart disease and stroke but the review could not pinpoint how much green tea someone would have to drink to receive any health benefits in 2014 another review studied the effects of drinking green tea on people with high blood pressure the report concluded that green tea was associated with a reduction in blood pressure but the authors were unable to determine if this modest reduction could help to prevent heart disease 10 nuts almonds hazelnuts peanuts pecans pistachios and walnuts are all hearthealthy nut options these nuts are full of protein fiber minerals vitamins and antioxidants like fish and flaxseeds walnuts are also ripe with omega3 fatty acids making them a hearthealthy snack to have on the go 11 liver of all the organ meats liver is the most nutrientdense in particular liver is bulging with folic acid iron chromium copper and zinc which increase the bloods hemoglobin level and help to keep our heart healthy 12 oatmeal because oatmeal is rich in soluble fiber it may help to reduce the risk of heart disease a 2008 review of the evidence concluded that oatbased products significantly reduce ldl and total cholesterol without any adverse effects 13 red wine sort of many studies have noted the potential health benefits of the antioxidants in red wine however it is unlikely that the benefits of the antioxidants outweigh the dangers of alcohol red wine contains beneficial antioxidants but bear in mind that it should only be consumed in moderation recently however a new study proposed that these same antioxidants could form the basis of a new stent for use during angioplasty the process where narrow or obstructed veins are widened to treat atherosclerosis the researchers behind that study are currently developing a new kind of stent that releases red winelike antioxidants into the blood to promote healing prevent blood clotting and reduce inflammation during angioplasty it is worth noting that drinking alcohol in general is not healthy for your heart in fact it is vitally important for cardiovascular health to drink alcohol in moderation if at all 14 spinach you can help to maintain a healthy heart rhythm by regularly consuming good sources of magnesium spinach is one of the best sources of dietary magnesium and consumption of popeyes favorite food is associated with a raft of health benefits 15 tomatoes tomatoes have lots of nutrients that might help keep our hearts healthy the little red fruits are chockfull of fiber potassium vitamin c folate and choline which are all good for the heart as well as helping to keep heart disease at bay potassium benefits muscles and bones and helps prevent kidney stones from forming scientists have argued that increasing potassium intake while decreasing sodium intake is the most important dietary change when attempting to reduce the risk of heart disease 16 vegetables the aha advise that we eat eight or more servings of fruit and vegetables each day vegetables are low in fat and calories but rich in fiber minerals and vitamins a healthful amount of veggies in the diet can help to moderate weight and blood pressureinsights from a new study by the university of cambridge in the united kingdom about the role of calcium in brain cells signaling mechanisms brings us closer to understanding the causes of parkinsons disease having excess calcium in the brain may be a reason for why parkinsons disease develops the presence of toxic protein deposits or lewy bodies inside brain cells is a recognized hallmark of parkinsons disease the deposits contain clusters of alphasynuclein and other proteins that have folded into the wrong shape the new study now published in the journal nature communications shows that calcium affects the way in which alphasynuclein binds to synaptic vesicles synaptic vesicles are small compartments in nerve terminals that hold the neurotransmitters or chemical messengers that carry signals between brain cells '' there is a fine balance '' notes cofirst author dr amberley stephens a postdoctoral researcher in molecular neuroscience at the university of cambridge `` of calcium and alphasynuclein in the cell and when there is too much of one or the other the balance is tipped and aggregation begins leading to parkinsons disease '' normal vs abnormal alphasynuclein worldwide there are more than 10 million people living with parkinsons disease including around 1 million in the united states in parkinsons disease there is a progressive destruction of brain cells that produce a neurotransmitter called dopamine which is important for controlling movement therefore as the disease progresses there will be a worsening of symptoms such as slowness of movement rigidity tremor and impaired coordination and balance could an existing drug halt parkinsons disease learn how a drug for a rare genetic disorder may be effective against toxic alphasynuclein clusters in brain cells read now more recent studies have revealed that parkinsons also affects brain cells that do not produce dopamine which might explain why some of the symptoms are not movementrelated although abnormal clusters of alphasynuclein a small protein comprising only 140 amino acids is a major element of the lewy bodies that are present in parkinsons disease its normal form appears to be necessary for a number of brain cell functions however apart from knowing that the protein somehow interacts with synaptic vesicles to ensure the smooth transport of molecules across the synapse or the gap between the nerve terminal and the next cell we know little about the underlying mechanism alphasynuclein acts like a calcium sensor '' alphasynuclein '' notes senior study author dr gabriele kaminski schierle of the department of chemical engineering and biotechnology at the university of cambridge `` is a very small protein with very little structure and it needs to interact with other proteins or structures in order to become functional which has made it difficult to study '' advances in microscope technology mean that researchers can now observe what happens inside cells dr kaminski schierle and colleagues used `` superresolution microscopy '' and `` isolated synaptic vesicles '' to examine the detailed behavior of alphasynuclein they found that when the level of calcium rises in the cell alphasynuclein binds to vesicles at more than one point which causes the vesicles to cluster '' we think '' explains cofirst author dr janin lautenschläger also of the department of chemical engineering and biotechnology `` that alphasynuclein is almost like a calcium sensor '' '' in the presence of calcium '' she continues `` it changes its structure and how it interacts with its environment which is likely very important for its normal function '' a delicate balance the authors propose that the abnormal clusters of alphasynuclein form when the delicate balance between the protein and calcium is upset they suggest a number of things that might cause such an imbalance such as agerelated slowing of the elimination of excess protein doubling of alphasynuclein production due to gene duplication higher calcium levels in brain cells vulnerable to parkinsons inability to buffer calcium effectively in parkinsonssensitive cells a more detailed understanding of how alphasynuclein behaves in both health and disease should lead to muchneeded new drugs for parkinsons disease the authors conclude they also note that a drug that blocks the calcium channel in heart disease might `` prove to be a valuable candidate to act against parkinsons disease via lowering intracellular calcium load '' '' this is the first time weve seen that calcium influences the way alphasynuclein interacts with synaptic vesicles '' dr janin lautenschlägertwo new studies confirm the hypothesis that the psychoactive compound found in `` magic mushrooms '' may be a useful new treatment for depression avoiding some of the side effects of conventional antidepressants magic mushrooms or shrooms may hold surprising benefits for our mental health at medical news today we have reported on a range of studies that pointed to psilocybin the psychoactive substance in `` magic mushrooms '' as a potential remedy for depression two such studies showed that the psychoactive compound can reduce feelings of anxiety and depression in people with advanced cancer while another small trial suggested that the compound could succeed where previous depression treatment has failed treating depression can be challenging not only because some depression types are treatmentresistant but also because existing therapies have a range of unwanted side effects one such adverse effect frequently reported by people living with depression is the `` emotional blunting '' indifference or apathy that comes with taking antidepressants a new study which was carried out by researchers at imperial college london icl in the united kingdom suggests that magic mushrooms could treat depression while avoiding these side effects the new research consists of two studies both of which were led by leor roseman a member of the psychedelic research group at icl participants felt emotionally reconnected in the first study published in the journal neuropharmacology 20 people diagnosed with moderate to severe depression that conventional treatment had not alleviated participated in two dosing sessions with the magic mushroom compound using functional mri fmri the team scanned the brains of the participants while they looked at pictures of emotive expressions the scans were taken before and after each drug intervention in order to assess the impact of the treatment on depression the subjects were all provided with psychological support before during and after the intervention after the treatment the participants reported feeling better `` emotionally reconnected and accepting '' the fmri scans also revealed a stronger brain response to emotive faces specifically the scientists saw more activity in the brains amygdala which is an emotionprocessing area associated with depression the study authors explain '' based on the present results we propose that psilocybin with psychological support is a treatment approach that potentially revives emotional responsiveness in depression enabling patients to reconnect with their emotions '' roseman comments on the new findings saying that they `` are important as they reveal biological changes after psilocybin therapy and more specifically they suggest that increased emotional processing is crucial for the treatment to work '' but the authors also caution that more research is needed to establish firmly whether the positive effects were due to the psychoactive compound itself the psychological counseling or the interruption of the antidepressant treatment the subjects had been on before the study '' having a healthy control group in future studies should be helpful in answering some of these questions '' roseman admits mystical experience improves efficacy the second paper published in the journal frontiers in pharmacology examined whether or not the quality of the psychedelic experience was linked with the success of the treatment roseman and colleagues gave questionnaires to another group of 20 volunteers who underwent two treatment sessions with psilocybin what to know about avoiding depression here are seven tips that may help you to avoid a depression relapse read now the researchers looked at the socalled feeling of oceanic boundlessness which is a `` mysticaltype experience '' involving feelings of unity and a lack of boundaries between the self and the universe the study revealed that the more strongly the participants felt this experience the better was their mental health in the longterm depressive symptoms subsided and the mental benefits lasted for weeks after the treatment in participants who reported a strong mystical experience '' future therapeutic work with psychedelics may consider investigating ways which enhance mysticaltype experience and reduce anxiety given the growing evidence that this serves the efficacy of the treatment model '' conclude the authors directions for future research the researchers are planning on carrying out larger trials with a healthy control group in which the effects of psilocybin could be compared with an existing antidepressant '' we also want to investigate how the amygdala responds a longer time after treatment '' roseman adds `` which will inform us about longerterm effects compared to the first study which was only looked at 1 day after the therapy '' additionally in light of the findings of their second study the group recommends that future trials with psychedelics should aim to enhance the `` mystical '' aspect of the experiencehiv therapy involves a combination of drugs that must be taken once or twice daily making treatment adherence challenging for many people but researchers may have found a solution to this problem in the form of a pill that only needs to be taken once per week researchers have developed a pill for hiv that would only need to be taken once weekly researchers from the massachusetts institute of technology mit and brigham and womens hospital both located in boston ma have developed an ingestible capsule that can slowly release 1 weeks worth of antiretroviral drugs the teams novel creation has the potential to transform hiv therapy as it means that people may only need to take a single pill once every week rather than multiple medications every day colead study author robert langer the david h koch institute professor at mit and his colleagues believe that their `` pillbox in a capsule '' could combat the current problem of adherence to antiretroviral therapy research has indicated that up to 30 percent of people with hiv fail to stick to their treatment regimen langer and his colleagues recently reported the details of their new creation in the journal nature communications hiv and antiretroviral therapy hiv is a virus that attacks and destroys immune cells that are important for staving off infection and disease if left untreated hiv can progress to aids wherein a persons immune system is so severely damaged that they become vulnerable to serious illnesses in 2016 there were around 367 million people across the globe living with hiv or aids of these individuals around 18 million were newly infected hiv could new injection work as effectively as daily drugs researchers suggest that a new antiretroviral injection may be just as effective as daily medications for hiv read now just 30 years ago hiv was considered by many as a death sentence today the virus can be successfully managed with antiretroviral drugs which work by reducing the level of hiv in the body a combination of different antiretroviral drugs must be taken every day in order for treatment to be successful but patients can find it hard to stick to such a regimen '' one of the main barriers to treating and preventing hiv is adherence '' notes the studys coauthor giovanni traverso of the mits koch institute for integrative cancer research `` the ability to make doses less frequent stands to improve adherence and make a significant impact at the patient level '' '' these slowrelease dosage systems perform equal or better than the current daily doses for hiv treatment in preclinical models '' he adds building the pillbox in a capsule with this in mind the researchers decided to build on an idea that first emerged in 2016 which was an ingestible capsule that could remain in the stomach for 2 weeks and deliver drugs in a previous study langer and his colleagues demonstrated how the capsule could help to treat malaria by slowly releasing controlled doses of the malaria drug ivermectin for their latest study the team looked at whether the capsule could be effective for the treatment of hiv but some design changes were required the original capsule consisted of six arms made of a single strong polymer each arm was loaded with drugs and folded in after ingestion the arms folded out and released the drugs for the treatment of hiv however the capsule would need to be able to release different drugs at different rates something that the original design did not allow as such the team adapted the design the main structure of the new capsule is still built from a single strong polymer but each of the six arms can hold a different medication thanks to the addition of `` release polymers '' '' in a way its like putting a pillbox in a capsule now you have chambers for every day of the week on a single capsule '' says traverso pill effective in pigs to test whether the newly designed capsule could be effective against hiv the researchers loaded it with three different antiretroviral drugs dolutegravir rilpivirine and cabotegravir that are currently used to both prevent and treat hiv on testing the drugloaded capsule on pigs the researchers found that the capsule successfully settled in the animals stomachs and they gradually released each of the three drugs over a 1week period once all of the drugs are released the capsule disintegrates allowing it to be passed through the gastrointestinal tract of course the capsule needs to be tested in humans before it can be used for the prevention and treatment of hiv but the researchers believe that their study results show promise the researchers calculated the potential impact of this onceaweek capsule at population level and they suggest that the pill could boost preventive treatment efficacy for hiv by 20 percent also approximately 200000–800000 new hiv infections could be prevented in south africa over the next 20 years commenting on the findings anthony fauci director of the national institute of allergy and infectious disease which helped to fund the study says `` a longeracting less invasive oral formulation could be one important part of our future arsenal to stop the hivaids pandemic '' '' new and improved tools for hiv treatment and prevention along with wider implementation of novel and existing approaches are needed to end the hiv pandemic as we know it studies such as this help us move closer to achieving this goal '' anthony fauciscientists experimenting with an innovative treatment for cancer have now devised a targeted injection that has already successfully eliminated tumors in mice could one shot administered directly to a solid tumor mark the end of cancer research devising more effective treatments for all types of cancer has been abundant over the past few years offering new hope all the time some of the most recent experiments include using stateoftheart nanotechnology to hunt down microtumors engineering microbes to thwart cancer cells and starving malignant tumors to death the latest study from stanford university school of medicine in california has investigated the potential of yet another approach injecting `` minute '' amounts of two agents that stimulate the bodys immune response directly into a malignant solid tumor so far their studies using mice have proven successful `` when we use these two agents together '' explains senior study author dr ronald levy `` we see the elimination of tumors all over the body '' '' this approach bypasses the need to identify tumorspecific immune targets and doesnt require wholesale activation of the immune system or customization of a patients immune cells '' dr ronald levy moreover the researchers have reason to believe in a speedier trajectory toward clinical trials for this method since one of the agents involved has already been approved for use in human therapy while the other is already under clinical trial for lymphoma treatment the studys findings were published yesterday in the journal science translational medicine onetime application of formula dr levy specializes in the use of immunotherapy which is a type of treatment wherein the bodys immune response is enhanced so that it can target cancer cells to fight lymphoma or cancer of the lymphatic system there are several types of immunotherapy including some that boost the entire immune system of the body and others that are a lot more targeted but the researchers note they all come with caveats attached crossdressing cells may improve cancer treatment what are `` crossdressing '' cells and how could they help us to fight cancer read now they may have problematic side effects be timeconsuming or be simply too costly the teams method however arguably has more benefits even beyond its potential effectiveness as a treatment '' our approach uses a onetime application of very small amounts of two agents to stimulate the immune cells only within the tumor itself '' dr levy explains this method can `` teach '' immune cells how to fight against that specific type of cancer which then allows them to migrate and destroy all other existing tumors although the immune systems role is to detect and eliminate harmful foreign bodies many types of cancer cell are able to evade detection in complex ways which enables them to grow and spread a type of white blood cell called t cells play a vital role in regulating the bodys immune response normally t cells would target and fight cancer tumors but all too often cancer cells learn to `` trick '' them and escape the immune response effective against many types of cancer in the new study dr levy and his team delivered micrograms of two specific agents into one hard tumor site in each of the affected mice the agents in question were cpg oligonucleotide a short stretch of synthetic dna that boosts the immune cells ability to express a receptor called ox40 which is found on the surface of t cells an antibody that binds to the receptor activating the t cells once the t cells are activated some of them migrate to other parts of the body `` hunting down '' and destroying other tumors importantly dr levy and his colleagues note that this method could be used to target a number of different kinds of cancer in each case the t cells will `` learn '' to deal with the specific type of cancer cell that they have been exposed to in the laboratory the scientists first applied this method to the mouse model of lymphoma and 87 out of 90 mice became cancerfree in the other three cases the tumors did recur but they disappeared when the researchers administered the treatment a second time similarly successful results were observed in the mouse model of breast colon and skin cancer also even the mice that were genetically engineered to develop breast cancer spontaneously responded well to this method of treatment a targeted approach however when scientists transplanted two different types of cancer tumor lymphoma and colon cancer in the same animal but only injected the experimental formula into a lymphoma site the results were mixed all the lymphoma tumors did recede but the same did not hold true for the colon cancer tumor confirming that the t cells only learn to deal with the cancer cells that were in their immediate vicinity before the injection as dr levy continues `` this is a very targeted approach only the tumor that shares the protein targets displayed by the treated site is affected were attacking specific targets without having to identify exactly what proteins the t cells are recognizing '' currently the team is preparing a clinical trial to test the effectiveness of this treatment in people with lowgrade lymphoma dr levy hopes that if the clinical trial is successful they will be able to extend this therapy to virtually any kind of cancer tumor in humans '' i dont think theres a limit to the type of tumor we could potentially treat as long as it has been infiltrated by the immune system '' dr levy concludesthe american college of physicians have now published their new guidelines regarding the desired blood sugar control levels for people with type 2 diabetes the recommendations aim to change current therapeutic practices and doctors should aim for a moderate level of blood sugar when treating their patients blood sugar control levels should be moderate for people living with type 2 diabetes according to new guidelines according to the most recent estimates almost 30 million people in the united states have type 2 diabetes which amounts to over 9 percent of the entire us population once diagnosed with type 2 diabetes patients are often advised to take what is known as a glycated hemoglobin hba1c test in order to keep blood sugar levels under control the test averages a persons blood sugar levels over the past 2 or 3 months with an hba1c score of 65 percent indicating diabetes patients who score over 65 percent would then be prescribed a daily insulin based treatment which they can inject themselves rapidacting injections take effect within 5 to 15 minutes but last for a shorter time of 3 to 5 hours longacting injections take effect after 1 or 2 hours and last for between 14 and 24 hours but some studies have pointed out that the hba1c test may currently be overused in the us and they have suggested that such overtesting may lead to overtreating patients with hypoglycemic drugs these drugs often have a range of side effects such as gastrointestinal problems excessively low blood sugar weight gain and even congestive heart failure additionally as some researchers have pointed out `` excessive testing contributes to the growing problem of waste in healthcare and increased patient burden in diabetes management '' in this context the american college of physicians acp set out to examine the existing guidelines from several organizations and the evidence available in an effort to help physicians make better more informed decisions about treating people with type 2 diabetes their guidelines were published in the journal annals of internal medicine an a1c of 7 to 8 percent is recommended as the acp explain the current rationale behind the existing recommendations of a score of 65 percent or below 7 percent is that keeping blood sugar this low would decrease the risk of microvascular complications over time however the acp found that the evidence for such a reduction is `` inconsistent '' as dr jack ende the president of acp puts it `` our analysis of the evidence behind existing guidelines found that treatment with drugs to targets of 7 percent or less compared to targets of about 8 percent did not reduce deaths or macrovascular complications such as heart attack or stroke but did result in substantial harms '' how can you lower your blood sugar levels here are some alternative ways to reduce your blood sugar levels read now he continues saying `` the evidence shows that for most people with type 2 diabetes achieving an a1c between 7 percent and 8 percent will best balance longterm benefits with harms such as low blood sugar medication burden and costs '' additionally the acp recommend that patients who are 80 years old and above or who live with chronic illnesses such as dementia cancer or congestive heart failure receive a treatment that focuses on reducing high blood sugarrelated symptoms instead of lowering hba1c levels the reason for this is that for patients in this category the potential side effects of hypoglycemic drugs outweigh the advantages '' results from studies included in all the guidelines demonstrate that health outcomes are not improved by treating to a1c levels below 65 percent '' dr ende explains '' however reducing drug interventions for patients with a1c levels persistently below 65 percent '' he continues `` will reduce unnecessary medication harms burdens and costs without negatively impacting the risk of death heart attacks strokes kidney failure amputations visual impairment or painful neuropathy '' '' although acps guidance statement focuses on drug therapy to control blood sugar a lower treatment target is appropriate if it can be achieved with diet and lifestyle modifications such as exercise dietary changes and weight loss '' dr jack endeas much of the world experiences a recordbreaking heat wave this spotlight turns its attention to vitamin d the socalled sunshine vitamin here we inspect the latest research the `` sunshine vitamin '' has a range of surprising benefits vitamin d is a hot topic currently with a raft of studies proclaiming its benefits for a variety of serious conditions conversely other recent studies have been more cautious questioning its perceived usefulness for treating some illnesses vitamin d is a nutrient that is synthesized in our skin when it is exposed to sunlight and it is also present in some foods sunlight is the best source of vitamin d but in the winter months the national institutes of health nih recommend topping up vitamin d levels by eating vitamin dcontaining foods each day these include oily fish fortified milk beef liver egg yolks mushrooms and fortified breakfast cereals what does vitamin d do scientists know that vitamin d is essential for many aspects of maintaining good health and that deficiency is linked with problems for both physical and mental health perhaps most notably vitamin d helps to regulate the levels of calcium in our bodies strengthening our bones and preventing boneweakening conditions such as osteoporosis increasingly though studies are also suggesting that vitamin d might have protective benefits against heart failure diabetes cancer respiratory tract infections autoimmune disease and even hair loss a surprisingly large number of people have insufficient levels of vitamin d for instance according to one study more than 40 percent of adults in the united states are deficient because of its prevalence it is important to determine what the public health implications of this epidemic might be symptoms of vitamin d deficiency can vary between individuals but they typically include pain in the joints muscles or bones fatigue breathing problems and low mood or seasonal affective disorder sad below we run through a number of intriguing recent studies that investigate associations between vitamin d and an assortment of illnesses vitamin d and heart failure several studies have suggested that vitamin d could offer protective benefits against cardiovascular illness but scientists have yet to pinpoint what mechanisms are driving this association recently though medical news today reported on a study that used a mouse model to investigate how a type of vitamin d called 125dihydroxyvitamin d3 affects heart cells in particular the researchers looked at the cells responsible for developing scar tissue following a heart attack called cardiac colonyforming unit fibroblasts ccfufs ccfufs are an important area of study because when heart tissue is scarred the heart has a harder time pumping blood which can lead to heart failure the researchers behind the study found that vitamin d inhibited the action of ccfufs which prevented scar tissue from building around the hearts of the mice in the study potentially preventing blockages in the cardiovascular system '' with further study '' wrote the authors `` vitamin d could prove to be an exciting lowcost addition to current treatments and we hope to progress these findings into clinical trials for humans '' vitamin d and cancer breast cancer and bowel cancer have both been linked with cases of vitamin d deficiency in recent studies one of these analyzed data from two randomized clinical trials and a prospective cohort study the researchers found that high levels of vitamin d were inversely associated with risk of breast cancer among women who were cancerfree at baseline studies suggest that vitamin d impacts breast cancer risk according to the study results the higher the levels of vitamin d the lower the risk of breast cancer this relationship remained significant even after the results were adjusted for confounding factors such as age body mass index bmi intake of calcium supplements and smoking habits although a link between vitamin d deficiency and colorectal cancer has previously been reported not all studies have been able to replicate these findings a new largescale study attempted to settle this by drawing on data from three continents including 5700 colorectal cancer cases and 7100 controls antifungal drug kills dormant colorectal cancer cells new research suggests that an existing antifungal drug could be effective against particularly persistent colorectal cancer cells read now the researchers calculated that people whose levels of vitamin d fall below those specified in the current guidelines have a 31 percent increased risk of developing bowel cancer by contrast those with vitamin d levels above the current recommended levels were 22 percent less likely to develop this cancer vitamin d and belly fat another recent study examined a previously observed link between obesity and lower levels of vitamin d focusing in particular on how different types of body fat might interact with vitamin d the study authors reported that having excess belly fat was linked with lower levels of vitamin d '' the strong relationship between increasing amounts of abdominal fat and lower levels of vitamin d suggests that individuals with larger waistlines are at a greater risk of developing deficiency and should consider having their vitamin d levels checked '' however the study was not able to prove whether a deficiency in vitamin d causes fat to be stored around the belly or if having belly fat somehow contributes to a deficiency in vitamin d the researchers say that future studies will attempt to determine cause and effect in this relationship vitamin d and alzheimers disease a systematic review from researchers in australia recently attempted to settle the debate surrounding vitamin ds ability to protect against alzheimers the systematic review analyzed more than 70 studies looking at the association they concluded that there was no significant association between vitamin d deficiency and risk of alzheimers intriguingly the authors did suggest that based on their systematic review there may be an association between exposure to the suns ultraviolet rays and protection against multiple sclerosis parkinsons disease and alzheimers but that this may be independent of vitamin d production the authors said that further studies would be needed to confirm these links and identify the mechanism responsible for such associations vitamin d and chronic pain over the years some scientists have theorized that low levels of vitamin d might cause or worsen chronic pain so in 2015 a group of scientists set out to collate existing evidence to examine the relationship could vitamin d ease chronic pain the resulting cochrane review updated in 2015 explains that '' observational and circumstantial evidence suggests that there may be a role for vitamin d deficiency in the etiology of chronic painful conditions '' the team scrutinized the findings from a number of studies following the analysis they concluded that the available scientific evidence is not strong enough to support a connection between vitamin d deficiency and chronic pain the authors write `` based on this evidence a large beneficial effect of vitamin d across different chronic painful conditions is unlikely whether vitamin d can have beneficial effects in specific chronic painful conditions needs further investigation '' so as ever more work will be needed to finally close the lid on this interaction we hope this article has enhanced your understanding of the latest scientific thinking around this fascinating chemical please remember however that overexposure to sunlight especially the hot midday sun can result in skin damage and increase risk of skin cancerit is still unclear what causes multiple sclerosis but new research closes in on the faulty immune system mechanisms involved in the development of this condition new research has identified another type of immune cell that may play a role in ms multiple sclerosis ms which is an autoimmune disease causes the immune system to mistakenly attack myelin myelin is the substance that coats axons which are the projections that allow neurons to connect and transmit information this process is known as demyelination and it affects the correct functioning of the central nervous system the condition is characterized by problems with balance and coordination as well as with eyesight to name but a few of its effects in the united states ms affects 250000–350000 people researchers still dont know for sure what causes ms but little by little they are uncovering the mechanisms at play and revealing more of the cellular culprits involved now neurologist roland martin and immunologist mireia sospedra at the university of zurich and university hospital zurich both in switzerland and colleagues have shown that a type of immune cell called b cells are key to the autoimmune reactions that characterize ms in a study whose results are now published in the journal cell the scientists explain that b cells influence the activity of another type of immune cell t cells which then cause inflammation '' we were able to show for the first time that certain b cells the cells of the immune system that produce antibodies activate the specific t cells that cause inflammation in the brain and nerve cell lesions '' roland martin b cells influence t cells studies into ms will tend to focus on the role played by t cells in the development of this condition since t cells are tasked with triggering an appropriate immune response once they detect the presence of pathogens when t cells malfunction and mistake healthy cells in the body for pathogens this causes harmful lesions and inflammation associated with autoimmune diseases such as ms ms new drug proven to slow brain shrinkage will this new drug vastly improve ms treatment read now martin and colleagues however found that the t cells may actually be mistakenly activated by other specialized immune cells the b cells this became apparent to the researchers after they observed the effects of certain drugs used to treat ms martin says `` a class of ms drugs called rituximab and ocrelizumab led us to believe that b cells also played an important part in the pathogenesis of the disease '' these drugs the authors note halt brain inflammation by removing b cells which suggests that these immune cells are ultimately responsible for the t cells activity a chain of reactions in order to better understand the role played by b cells in inflammation the researchers analyzed blood samples from people with ms through an experimental in vitro method they noticed that b cells were interacting with specialized t cells boosting their activity and influencing them to divide more thus feeding their attack cycle it became clear that b cells were the cause of t cell activity because when they eliminated the former the latter stopped proliferating '' this means that we can now explain the previously unclear mechanism of these ms drugs '' explains martin the investigators also note that the activated t cells they studied in the blood samples include the population of t cells that are active in brain inflammation related to ms martin and his team suggest that the t cells are able to read both the proteins released by b cells and recognize the nerve cells in the brain the scientists say that t cells are first activated in the peripheral blood only to migrate to the brain where they end up attacking myelin '' our findings not only explain how new ms drugs take effect but also pave the way for novel approaches in basic research and therapy for ms '' says martinafter tumor removal surgery treatment with erectile dysfunction drugs and a flu vaccine may help to stop the cancer returning these common medications could help to prevent cancer returning these drugs aided by the flu vaccine remove a block to the immune system that can sometimes result from cancer surgery and also give it a boost this was the conclusion that researchers at the university of ottawa in canada came to after they tested the effect of tadalafil cialis sildenafil viagra and an inactivated version of the flu vaccine agriflu in mouse models of postsurgery metastasis in a paper now published in the journal oncoimmunology they report how the unusual combination reduced cancer spread in the mice by over 90 percent a clinical trial to test the effects and safety of the treatment in humans is already under way googleadslotinfopush { '' slotname '' mnt_dlb1 '' slotcontainer '' mnt_dlb1_container } surgery can promote metastasis '' surgery '' says senior study author rebecca c auer an associate professor in the department of biochemistry microbiology and immunology `` is very effective in removing solid tumors '' but as she and her colleagues explain in their paper `` cancer surgery '' can also block the immune systems ability to eliminate any remaining cancer cells which can then spread to form new secondary tumors in a process known as metastasis viagra may cut colorectal cancer risk by half giving mice a small daily dose of viagra reduced the formation of polyps by 50 percent read now metastasis accounts for the vast majority of deaths to cancer and is the main reason that the disease is so serious the immune system has many cells that patrol the body in search of potentially harmful agents to destroy these agents are not just bacteria viruses and other pathogens but also cancer cells cancer surgery can undermine the immune system by `` altering the function of natural killer nk cells '' which are white blood cells that play a key role in clearing away metastatic cancer cells googleadslotinfopush { '' slotname '' mnt_dlb2 '' slotcontainer '' mnt_dlb2_container } surgery weakens natural killer cells tests of animals and human patients have shown that tumor surgery can weaken the ability of nk cells to attack and kill cancer cells for up to 1 month after the procedure prof auer and colleagues found that surgery does this in a roundabout way it stimulates another group of immune cells called myeloid derived suppressor cells mdscs which in turn will then inhibit the nk cells the new study shows that the erectile dysfunction drugs remove the brakes on the nk cells by targeting the `` surgeryinduced '' mdscs while the flu vaccine gives the nk cells an additional boost the researchers tested various combinations of the drugs and vaccine in mouse models of postoperative metastasis they evaluated the effectiveness of treatment by counting the number of metastases that arose in the lungs of the animals the results showed that on average without surgery the cancer spread and gave rise to 37 metastases surgery with no drugs or vaccine resulted in 129 metastases giving one erectile dysfunction drug after surgery limited the spread to 24 metastases giving one erectile dysfunction drug and the flu vaccine after surgery limited spread to just 11 metastases clinical trial the clinical trial that is already under way involves 24 patients who are having surgery to remove an abdominal tumor at the ottawa hospital the purpose of the small trial is to evaluate the safety of the treatment which is based on cialis and agriflu and observe how it affects the immune system should the trial be successful the next stage will be larger trials that assess the potential benefits prof auer says that she and her colleagues are `` really excited '' about their work because it may show that `` two safe and relatively inexpensive therapies may be able to solve a big problem in cancer '' '' if confirmed in clinical trials this could become the first therapy to address the immune problems caused by cancer surgery '' prof rebecca c auera new study conducted by researchers at stanford university in california reveals that common foods can cause blood sugar spikes in otherwise healthy people paying closer attention to these spikes could prevent diabetes and some of its complications over the course of a day blood sugar levels may spike to diabetic and prediabetic levels even in healthy individuals diabetes affects over 30 million people in the united states which is almost 10 percent of the population an additional 84 million people have prediabetes abnormal blood sugar levels are a hallmark of this metabolic disease to measure these levels physicians use two main methods they either take fasting blood sugar samples which informs them of the level of sugar in the blood at that specific point or they measure levels of glycated hemoglobin hba1c the glycated hemoglobin test is routinely used to diagnose diabetes and it relies on the average levels of blood sugar over a period of 3 months despite their widespread use neither of these methods can say anything about the fluctuations in blood sugar that happen over the course of a day so researchers led by michael snyder who is a professor of genetics at stanford set out to monitor these daily fluctuations in otherwise healthy individuals they looked at the patterns of blood sugar change after a meal and examined how these patterns vary between different people who have had the same meal prof snyder and colleagues published the results of their research in the journal plos biology three types of blood sugar variability for their study the researchers recruited 57 adults aged 51 years on average who had not been diagnosed with diabetes prof snyder and team used novel devices called continuous glucose monitors to assess the blood sugar of the participants in their normal environment also the researchers evaluated the participants wholebody insulin resistance and insulin secretion the blood sugar and metabolic measurements allowed the researchers to group the participants into three different `` glucotypes '' based on the patterns of blood sugar variability type 2 diabetes new guidelines lower blood sugar control levels the latest recommendations from the american college of physicians aim to change how physicians treat their patients read now people whose blood sugar did not vary much were grouped under `` low variability '' those whose blood sugar was found to spike quite often were grouped under `` severe variability '' and finally people who fell in between were classified as the `` moderate '' glucotype the findings revealed that `` glucose dysregulation as characterized by continuous glucose monitoring is more prevalent and heterogeneous than previously thought and can affect individuals considered normoglycemic by standard measures '' glucose often in prediabetic diabetic range next the researchers wanted to see how people of different glucotypes reacted to the same meal so they offered all the participants three types of standard breakfasts cornflakes with milk bread with peanut butter and a protein bar each participant responded uniquely to these breakfasts which suggests that different people metabolize the same food in different ways additionally the study revealed that common foods such as corn flakes caused significant blood sugar spikes in most people '' we were very surprised to see blood sugar in the prediabetic and diabetic range in these people so frequently the idea is to try to find out what makes someone a spiker and be able to give them actionable advice to shift them into the low glucotype '' prof michael snyder '' our next study will delve into the physiological causes of glucose dysregulation '' continues the senior investigator `` these include not only genetic variation but also microbiome composition and pancreas liver and digestive organ functions '' the researchers hope that their recent and future findings will help to prevent diabetes and its complicationsnumerous people in the united states and across the world are dog lovers and no wonder dogs can be loyal loving friends and a source of spontaneous joy but dogs that are stressed scared injured or ill can easily cause harm to unsuspecting humans is our behavior part of the problem a new study looks to youtube videos to understand why some dogs bite and who is more likely to get bitten dogs are for the most part our best friends many of us have given in to the temptation of petting a strangers adorable trusting dog as it passed us on our evening walk in most cases nothing other than a moment of delight with a friendly animal takes place sometimes however dogs have been known to turn from friend to foe and suddenly snap and bite at a hand outstretched to pat some studies suggest that all in all around 1000 persons end up in emergency rooms every day due to dog bites and in some cases infected wounds may place a person at risk of rabies or tetanus but the reasons behind why dogs that may otherwise seem affectionate and approachable become aggressive are not always straightforward and researchers dont have much to go on to try to understand why humans most loyal companion unexpectedly becomes aggressive at times usually data rely on information provided by individuals who have already been bitten and they may only offer an incomplete or unreliable account of the encounter but recently investigators from the university of liverpool in the united kingdom have turned to an unexpected source of information that they hope may offer a better perspective on the context in which biting takes place youtube videos '' online videos present us with an unexplored opportunity to observe dog bites firsthand something which is just not possible using other methods '' says lead study author sara owczarczakgarstecka adding '' making more use of this type of shared content for research could help us better understand how and why bites occur and contribute to the development of bite prevention strategies '' the researchers findings were published in the journal scientific reports children and infants get bitten more often the scientists methodology was fairly simple they used telling keywords including `` dog bite '' and `` dog attack '' to search youtube for videos depicting individuals getting bitten by dogs owczarczakgarstecka and team ended up analyzing 143 clips showing 362 bites uploaded to the popular website between january 2016 and march 2017 in each case the researchers assessed the context in which the dog ended up biting a person the severity of the bite who got bitten and what breed the dog pertained to in 56 of the clips the researchers were also able to ascertain what behavior both humans and dogs exhibited prior to the bite owczarczakgarstecka and team found that of the dog breeds often chosen as pets it was mostly chihuahuas german shepherds pit bulls and labrador retrievers that appeared to do the biting yet more often than not the `` offenders '' were crossbreed dogs how does rabies cause aggression dogs infected with rabies become extremely aggressive and dangerous what are the biological mechanisms behind this disease read now about 7 in 10 of the people who got bitten were male and in more than half of the situations the victims were children or infants the researchers warn that due to the relatively small number of video samples that they analyzed they were unable to establish clear relationships of causality between certain types of human behavior and instances of aggression in dogs however they did note that in many cases `` tactile contact with a dog '' became more insistent 21 seconds before the biting and that individuals getting bitten often stood or leant over the dog still owczarczakgarstecka and team admit that they struggled with some limitations especially the fact that youtube videos may be biased users the researchers surmised may be more likely to upload videos in which small dogs such as chihuahuas do the biting as these may be perceived as funnier and more likely to attract a larger number of viewers the researchers next step from here will be to study the behavior of people who interact with dogs in greater depth as well as their perception of dog bites and when they take place in order to do so they plan to interview dog owners people who work with dogs and those who have previously been bitten '' the findings '' owczarczakgarstecka explains `` could offer some valuable new insight for the development of bite prevention strategies '' '' prevention messages could emphasize the risk of leaning over a dog and simply advise avoiding contact with a dog when possible or in doubt '' she concludesdespite our best efforts to remain thin it seems that during the holiday season we put on a lot of weight why is that a new study has a surprising answer how much sunlight we get may influence how much weight we lose suggests new research plenty of us are familiar with the holiday weight phenomenon but while it is true that during the holidays were more exposed to delicious food than the rest of the year some studies have shown that in winter we continue to pack on the pounds despite conscious efforts to lose them why a new study by researchers at the university of alberta in edmonton canada reveals an unexpected culprit for winter weight gain the absence of sunlight the researchers who were led by the auspiciously named peter light from the alberta diabetes institute examined the effect of sunlight on subcutaneous fat cells or white fat cells that can be found right beneath our skin the results of their investigation make this a breakthrough study and it was recently published in the journal scientific reports how sunlight burns fat light and team examined the socalled subcutaneous white adipose tissue scwat which as the authors explain is the `` major fat depot in humans and a central player in regulating whole body metabolism '' white fat is known as the `` bad '' type of fat because it stores calories that are ideally burned for energy if dysfunctional this type of fat can lead to cardiometabolic disorders such as obesity diabetes and heart disease new drug could shrink harmful fat cells what if there was a magic pill that could help you to lose weight without any of the effort read now so in an attempt to help people with type 1 diabetes light and colleagues were working on a way to genetically engineer these white fat cells to produce insulin when exposed to light accidentally they discovered that scwat cells tend to shrink under the effect of the suns socalled blue light that is the visible type of light that boosts attention and mood during the day to further test their discovery the scientists took samples of scwat from patients undergoing weight loss surgery and examined the effect of the suns blue light on the fat cells this is what they found '' when the suns blue light wavelengths the light we can see with our eye penetrate our skin and reach the fat cells just beneath lipid droplets reduce in size and are released out of the cell in other words our cells dont store as much fat '' peter light winter weight gain explained '' if you flip our findings around '' light says `` the insufficient sunlight exposure we get 8 months of the year living in a northern climate may be promoting fat storage and contribute to the typical weight gain some of us have over winter '' '' its early days but its not a giant leap to suppose that the light that regulates our circadian rhythm received through our eyes may also have the same impact through the fat cells near our skin '' he adds the findings may pave the way for new weight loss strategies or lightbased therapies in the treatment of obesity and diabetes however light cautions against taking these findings too literally and pursuing sunlight exposure in order to lose weight as there are still many variables that remain unknown '' for example '' he explains `` we dont yet know the intensity and duration of light necessary for this pathway to be activated '' additionally he notes `` there is a lot of literature out there suggesting our current generation will be more overweight than their parents and maybe this feeds into the debate about what is healthy sunshine exposure '' either way this exciting discovery `` certainly holds many fascinating clues for our team and others around the world to explore '' light concludestoo much salt can cause cognitive deficits according to a new study published in the journal nature neuroscience luckily these negative effects may be reversed and the new study shows how too much salt in our diet can have devastating effects on our brain power and new research reveals the mechanism behind this its a wellknown fact that too much salt in our diet raises the risk of cardiovascular disease and high blood pressure but it is less known that brainrelated problems such as cerebrovascular disease stroke and cognitive impairment have all been linked to dietary salt as the authors of the new research explain it was suggested that one possible mechanism behind these negative effects involves the socalled endothelial cells inside the cerebral blood vessels endothelial cells line our blood vessels and are responsible for regulating the vascular tone but a high dietary intake of salt has been associated with dysfunction of these cells although it is known that epithelial dysfunction can bring a plethora of chronic illnesses it remains unclear exactly how saltinduced endothelial dysfunction may affect the brain in the long run this is particularly important given that the brain is heavily reliant on a steady and smooth flow of oxygen to function properly explain the study authors who were led in their research efforts by costantino iadecola from weill cornell medicine in new york city ny in their paper iadecola and colleagues show how excessive dietary salt affects our gut immune system and ultimately our brain how excessive salt affects the gutbrain axis iadecola and team fed a group of mice the equivalent of a human diet high in salt for a period of 12 weeks after the first few weeks endothelial dysfunction as well as a reduction in the blood flow to the brain could be noticed in the mice additionally behavioral tests revealed cognitive decline in the rodents their blood pressure however remained unchanged an important discovery was the increase in the guts socalled th17 white blood cells in turn the high number of th17 cells led to an increase in the levels of a proinflammatory molecule called plasma interleukin17 il17 researchers reveal how to boost brain power scientists reveal a braintraining method proven to boost your working memory read now the researchers were also able to identify the molecular pathway through which higher levels of il17 in the blood led to the negative cognitive and cerebrovascular effects the researchers wanted to see whether or not their findings would replicate in human cells so they treated human endothelial cells with il17 and obtained similar results as iadecola and his colleagues explain '' the findings unveil a gutbrain axis by which environmental factors linked to the diet lead to an adaptive immune response in the gut promoting neurovascular dysregulation and cognitive impairment '' dietary changes can reverse negative effects the good news is that the negative effects of the highsalt diet seem to be reversible the mice were returned to a normal diet after the 12 weeks and the results were encouraging '' the harmful effects of a highsalt diet were abrogated by returning the mice to a normal diet pointing to the reversibility of the vascular dysfunction and cognitive impairment '' write the authors additionally they experimented with a drug that also reversed the effects of excessive salt the amino acid larginine had the same beneficial effect on the mice as returning them to a normal diet the findings suggest that lifestyle changes or a new class of drugs may help to offset the negative effects of a highsalt dietnew research published in the journal appetite suggests that when it comes to dieting its not how much you eat but rather what you eat that influences calorie intake the most opting for more healthful foods such as salads may be more important than the amount of food that we eat faris zuraikat a graduate student in the department of nutritional sciences at pennsylvania state university led the new study which follows up from a previous 1year randomized controlled trial that investigated how different food portions influenced weight loss the former trial aimed to explore the socalled `` portion size effect '' which occurs when people are served bigger portions than what they originally wanted but end up eating more nonetheless to this end the previous trial trained the participants to gain more control over their portions presenting them with useful strategies for portion size management in this new trial study the researchers wanted to see if people who had been previously trained to manage their portions would respond differently to increasing portion sizes by comparison with untrained people as the studys first author explains the researchers `` were also interested in whether those untrained individuals with overweight and obesity or normal weight differed in their response '' calorie intake vs portion size effect to find out the researchers gathered three groups of women 34 women who were overweight and had not participated in the previous trial 29 healthy `` control '' women who had a regular weight and who had also not participated in the trial and finally 39 women with overweight and obesity who had taken part in the portioncontrolling trial during the study all women were served the same foods once a week for 4 weeks but the size of their food increased in a random order what are the best foods for weight loss in the spirit of `` its not how much you eat but what you eat '' here are some foods that promote weight loss according to available research read now additionally and significantly the calorie content of the food served also varied the foods ranged from highcalorie ones such as garlic bread to lowcalorie foods such as salads the study revealed that when given bigger portions the women across all three groups consumed more food however the participants who had been trained in portion control in the previous trial consumed fewer calories than the untrained participants '' the lower energy intake of trained participants was attributable to consuming meals with a greater proportion of lowerenergy density foods than controls '' write the authors '' all the groups were served the same meals but their food choices differed '' explains the studys lead author `` the participants who went through the training consumed more of the lower caloriedense foods and less of the higher caloriedense foods than the untrained controls '' '' consequently trained participants calorie intake was less than that of the control groups whose intake didnt differ by weight status '' why choosing lowcalorie food is important the studys lead researcher explains the significance of the findings saying `` the results show that choosing healthy lowercaloriedense foods was more effective and more sustainable than just trying to resist large portions of higher calorie options '' '' if you choose highcaloriedense foods but restrict the amount that youre eating portions will be too small and youre likely to get hungry '' zuraikat goes on barbara rolls a professor of nutritional sciences at penn state and a coauthor on the study also chimes in '' the study supports the idea that eating less of the highercaloriedense foods and more of the nutritious lowercaloriedense foods can help to manage hunger while consuming fewer calories '' barbara rolls '' you still have a full plate '' she adds `` but youre changing the proportions of the different types of foods '' the findings are particularly significant given that people who want to lose weight are often told that eating `` a bit of everything '' helps as long as the food is consumed in moderation on the contrary the new research seems to suggest that opting for more nutritious lowcalorie foods is far more important than trying to eat lessthe findings of a new study might hold promise for the future of treating chronic autoimmune conditions such as systemic lupus and autoimmune liver disease according to its authors researchers suggest that targeting a specific gut bacterium could help to prevent autoimmune disease in the study researchers from yale university in new haven ct discovered that bacteria in the small intestine can travel to other organs and induce an autoimmune response importantly the team also found that this reaction can be treated by targeting the bacteria with an antibiotic or vaccine the study results were recently published in the journal science in autoimmune diseases the immune system mistakingly attacks healthy cells and tissues some of the most common autoimmune diseases include type 1 diabetes lupus and celiac disease according to the national institutes of health nih around 235 million people in the united states are affected by autoimmune diseases a variety of autoimmune conditions have been linked to bacteria in the gut using a mouse model the yale team specifically looked at a bacterium called enterococcus gallinarum which can travel beyond the gut to the spleen lymph nodes and liver the team found that e gallinarum provoked an autoimmune response in the mice when it traveled beyond the gut the researchers were able to replicate this mechanism using cultured human liver cells and they also found e gallinarum to be present in the livers of people who have autoimmune disease how your gut bacteria may protect you from cancer not all gut bacteria are bad researchers reveal how they could help to prevent cancer read now by administering an antibiotic or vaccine to target e gallinarum the scientists then found that it was possible to suppress the autoimmune reaction in the mice and prevent the bacterium from growing '' when we blocked the pathway leading to inflammation '' says senior study author martin kriegel `` we could reverse the effect of this bug on autoimmunity '' '' the vaccine against e gallinarum was a specific approach as vaccinations against other bacteria we investigated did not prevent mortality and autoimmunity '' martin kriegel kriegel adds that the team plans to further study the biological mechanisms that are associated with e gallinarum and the implications that they might have for systemic lupus and autoimmune liver disease study adds to previous research the new study complements previous studies that have uncovered a link between gut bacteria and autoimmune diseases studies in mice for example have found that the colonization of the gut by some bacteria can lay the groundwork for the development of autoimmune disorders in the future these bacteria can cause changes in the tissue of the gut resulting in the production of antibodies that attack cells in conditions such as systemic lupus previously medical news today covered a study that suggested that altering gut bacteria might help to alleviate lupus symptoms the study published in the journal applied and environmental microbiology showed that species of lactobacillus in the gut of a lupus mouse model were linked to a reduction of lupus symptoms while the lachnospiraceae bacteria were associated with worsening symptoms of lupus '' the use of probiotics prebiotics and antibiotics '' said husen zhang first author of that study `` has the potential to alter microbiota dysbiosis which in turn could improve lupus symptoms ''new data presented at the annual meeting of the endocrine society held in chicago il suggests that consuming lowcalorie sweeteners could put people at risk of metabolic syndrome are lowcalorie sweeteners worse for health than they seem around 34 percent of adults in the united states have metabolic syndome the umbrella term for high blood pressure high blood sugar high cholesterol levels and abdominal fat we know that metabolic syndrome doubles the risk of heart disease and disease of the blood vessels putting individuals at risk of heart disease and stroke people with metabolic syndrome are also three to five times more likely to develop type 2 diabetes recently on medical news today we looked at how metabolic syndrome could be managed by yoga a study published in the scandinavian journal of medicine science in sports found that participants who took part in a yearlong yoga training course demonstrated a decrease in proinflammatory adipokines and an increase antiinflammatory adipokines adipokines are signaling proteins that instruct the immune system to either increase or decrease inflammation so it appeared that yoga benefitted the people with metabolic syndrome by reducing inflammation allowing them to better manage their symptoms another recent study even suggested that compounds found in beer could provide significant health benefits for people with metabolic syndrome by helping to improve insulin resistance in the new study researchers from george washington university in washington dc examined the effects of a lowcalorie sweetener called sucralose on human stem cells from fat tissue these were experimented on in petri dishes that simulated an obesitypromoting environment lowcalorie sweeteners increase fat formation study finds learn more about how lowcalorie sweeteners may actually increase the formation of fat read now the scientists mimicked the typical concentration of sucralose in the blood of people who consume high quantities of lowcalorie sweeteners when this was administered to the stem cells the team noticed increased expression of genes linked with fat production and inflammation the authors followed this up with a separate experiment involving biopsy samples of abdominal fat from people who were regular consumers of lowcalorie sweeteners in fat samples from people that were a healthy weight they did not find a significant increase in gene expression but in the fat samples from overweight or obese participants there was significant overexpression of fatproducing and inflammationinducing genes the study authors believe that these patterns in gene expression create conditions favorable to metabolic syndrome which in turn increases risk of prediabetes and diabetes findings should be of concern study coauthor sabyasachi sen who is an associate professor of medicine at george washington university describes the results '' our stem cellbased studies indicate that lowcalorie sweeteners promote additional fat accumulation within cells compared with cells not exposed to these substances in a dosedependent fashion meaning that as the dose of sucralose is increased more cells showed increased fat droplet accumulation '' '' this most likely occurs by increasing glucose entry into cells through increased activity of genes called glucose transporters '' prof sen explains that these findings should be of particular concern to people who are obese and have prediabetes or diabetes as these people are already at increased risk for heart attack and strokes the scientists believe that the overexpression in fatrelated genes is more pronounced in these people because they have increased amounts of glucose in their blood which creates insulin resistanceusing a new approach scientists have located a compound that stops the spread of breast pancreatic and prostate cancers in mice cancer metastasis could one day be halted by metarrestin the compound which they call metarrestin destroys a unique structure inside the nucleus of cancer cells that can spread and form new tumors a paper on the work in which researchers from the national institutes of health nih collaborated with those from northwestern university feinberg school of medicine in chicago il is published in science translational medicine in describing how metarrestin works cocorresponding study author sui huang who works as an associate professor of cell and molecular biology at northwestern university feinberg school of medicine likens it to a `` dirty bomb against cancer '' '' it could potentially result in a better outcome for patients with solid tumor cancers with high potential to spread to other organs '' she adds metastasis the final frontier cancer would not be such a potentially serious disease if it were not capable of metastasis which is a complex process wherein cancer cells escape the primary tumor and invade nearby or distant tissue to form new secondary tumors '' what kills people '' prof huang explains `` is when cancer spreads to other organs such as when breast cancer spreads to the brain liver lungs or bones '' cancer new drug may fight treatment resistance a new compound that blocks a molecule that cancer cells use to transcribe genetic information shows promise in treating drugresistant tumors read now metastasis is sometimes referred to as `` the last frontier of cancer research '' it accounts for around 90 percent of cancer deaths and this figure has not altered much in half a century once a cancer reaches the metastatic stage it becomes very difficult to treat with current methods which are much more effective at tackling the primary tumor '' many drugs '' explains cocorresponding study author dr juan jose marugan group leader of the chemical genomics center at the nihs national center for advancing translational sciences in rockville md `` are aimed at stopping cancer growth and killing cancer cells '' but so far no drug has been approved that is designed specifically against metastasis he adds metarrestin kills perinucleolar compartments metarrestin destroys a littleunderstood structure inside the nucleus of cancer cells that is known as the `` perinucleolar compartment pnc '' tests on laboratorycultured cancer cells and cells sampled from human tumors have shown that `` pncs selectively form in cells from solid tumors '' also in previous work prof huang and her team had discovered that the likelihood of cancer spread was greater when tumor cells had more pncs this led the team to wonder whether attacking pncs might reduce cancer spread and improve patients prospects in this study the scientists used `` highthroughput screening followed by chemical optimization '' to assess which compound from a list of at least 140000 might have the greatest power to destroy pncs in metastatic cancer cells they whittled down the list to 100 compounds and then they identified one that destroyed pncs in metastatic prostate cancer cells a modified version of the compound became metarrestin which `` significantly inhibited metastasis '' in mice grafted with human pancreatic breast and prostate cancer the treated mice also lived longer than untreated mice the researchers intend to apply for metarrestin to enter the food and drug administration fda new drug investigation process later this year after they have run more preclinical tests and collected the data required '' our results show metarrestin is a very promising agent that we should continue to investigate against metastasis '' dr juan jose marugannight shift work has long been linked to poor health now a new study suggests that for women such working patterns could increase the risk of cancer female night shift workers may be at greater cancer risk researchers warn researchers found that women who engaged in longterm night shifts were almost a fifth more likely to develop cancer when compared with women who did not work such shifts on looking at specific cancers the researchers found that women who worked longterm night shifts were at even greater risk of skin cancer breast cancer and lung cancer study coauthor xuelei ma phd of the west china medical center at sichuan university in china and colleagues recently reported their findings in the journal cancer epidemiology biomarkers prevention according to the centers for disease control and prevention cdc nearly 15 million people in the united states have irregular working patterns including night shifts previous research has shown that night shift work can severely disrupt our circadian rhythm this is the internal clock that regulates the bodys physiological processes over a 24hour cycle and it primarily responds to light and dark in the environment shift work has been linked to a wealth of poor health outcomes including obesity heart disease and some types of cancer in the new study ma and colleagues sought to learn more about the link between longterm night shift work and cancer risk overall cancer risk increased by 19 percent the researchers came to their findings by conducting a metaanalysis of 61 studies these included a total of 3909152 participants and more than 114000 cancer cases subjects were from asia australia europe and north america the team used these data to assess how longterm night shift work was associated with the risk of developing 11 cancer types in a separate analysis the researchers looked at whether longterm night shift work among female nurses was linked to the risk of six cancer types how does alcohol cause cancer researchers shed light on how alcohol consumption may lead to the development of cancer read now overall the new study revealed that women who worked longterm night shifts were at 19 percent greater risk of cancer compared with women who did not work longterm night shifts additionally the researchers found that women who engaged in longterm night shift work had a 41 percent greater risk of skin cancer a 32 percent greater risk of breast cancer and an 18 percent increased risk of gastrointestinal cancer in a doseresponse analysis it was also found that each additional 5 years of night shift work was associated with 33 percent increase in breast cancer risk the researchers report further investigation however revealed that the link between night shift work and greater breast cancer risk was only applicable for women who lived in north america or europe '' it is possible that women in these locations have higher sex hormone levels '' ma suggests `` which have been positively associated with hormonerelated cancers such as breast cancer '' a risk factor for common cancers from the analysis of female nurses alone the researchers found that longterm night shift work was linked to a 58 percent greater risk of breast cancer a 35 percent increased risk of gastrointestinal cancer and a 28 percent greater lung cancer risk discussing the possible reasons for the increased cancer risk among female nurses ma speculates that these women may have been more likely to undergo cancer screening due to their profession '' another possible explanation for the increased cancer risk in this population may relate to the job requirements of night shift nursing such as more intensive shifts '' adds ma overall the scientists say that their findings indicate that more needs to be done to protect the health of female shift workers particularly those who engage in such shifts for many years '' our study indicates that night shift work serves as a risk factor for common cancers in women these results might help establish and implement effective measures to protect female night shifters longterm night shift workers should have regular physical examinations and cancer screenings '' xuelei ma phd ma adds that he hopes that this research will encourage larger cohort studies in order to confirm the link between longterm night shift work and cancer among womenmultiple sclerosis can cause debilitating fatigue vision problems impaired balance and coordination and muscle stiffness it is usually disabling and its causes have not yet been clearly identified research from switzerland identifies a key factor that allows immune cells to attack neurons potentially triggering ms in multiple sclerosis ms our immune system mistakenly attacks myelin or the sheath that covers the axon the axon is the projection that allows brain cells to send electric signals carrying information as the damage occurs various functions such as motor and cognitive functions and sight are gradually impaired according to atlas an ms resource put together jointly by the world health organization who and the ms international federation in 2008 on a global level `` the median estimated prevalence of ms is 30 per 100000 '' and the united states has one of the highest prevalences of ms cases what exactly causes ms is yet unclear meaning that currently treatments focus on managing the symptoms of the condition rather than eliminating its biological triggers but emerging research from the university of geneva and the geneva university hospitals both in switzerland may have just brought us one step closer to understanding what drives the development of this disease '' we decided '' explains senior researcher doron merkler `` to analyze the infectious factors in ms by studying the autoimmune reactions provoked by different pathogens '' '' this was to try to pinpoint an element that might influence the development of ms where there has been an infection '' he adds the teams findings were published yesterday in the journal immunity viral pathogen triggers autoimmunity merkler and team decided to test out the immune systems reaction to two different pathogens or diseasecausing bacteria a viral and a bacterial one to understand what might trigger a response consistent with the development of ms to do so they worked with a mouse model injecting each type of pathogen into healthy rodents what they noticed was that a certain type of white blood cell cd8+ t lymphocytes which play a key role in the bodys immune response reacted in similar ways both to the viral and to the bacterial pathogen '' we saw a quantitatively identical immune reaction from the lymphocytes called cd8+ t '' says first author nicolas page sheep disease toxin shines a light on multiple sclerosis is there a relationship between sheep disease and ms read now '' however '' he adds `` only the mouse infected with the viral pathogen developed an inflammatory brain disease reminiscent of ms '' this observation led the scientists to examine gene expression in cd8+ t cells to see how it was affected by the viral pathogen they found that the lymphocytes that had reacted to the bacterium expressed a particular dnabinding factor or proteins that help to organize dna tox tox contributes to the development of certain lymphocytes that then mount an immune response in reaction to foreign bodies that are perceived as threatening in this case as page further explains they `` found that the inflammation environment influences the expression of tox in t lymphocytes and that it could play a role in triggering ms '' how does tox lead to ms but how could the team decide whether tox expression was in fact crucial in the development of an autoimmune disease such as ms they thought that a good way of proving its significance was by repressing the dnabinding factor in the cd8+ t cells of healthy mice what the researchers then noticed was in merklers words that `` although they received the viral pathogen the mice did not develop the disease '' normally our brains are well equipped to fend off autoimmune reactions that might damage the neurons and impact the central nervous system '' our brains have a limited regenerative capacity which is why they have to protect themselves against the bodys immune reactions which can destroy its cells by wanting to fight the virus creating irreversible damage '' merkler explains '' the brain then sets up barriers that block the passage of t lymphocytes '' he adds however when tox is activated in cd8+ t lymphocytes it renders the cells unable to receive some of the signals that the brain sends to prevent them from attacking healthy neurons so without this `` memo '' the lymphocytes then mount an autoimmune response that targets the brain cells '' this is an encouraging result for understanding the causes of the disease but there is still lots of work to be done to ascertain what really causes multiple sclerosis in humans '' says page so the next step from here for the research team will be to gain a better understanding of toxs role and to see whether it might be involved in triggering other autoimmune diseases apart from ms as well as certain types of cancerscientists have developed a new vaccine that in conjunction with existing therapies can not only treat aggressive melanoma but also prevent its recurrence have researchers finally found the best vaccine against aggressive melanoma researchers from the scripps research institute in san diego ca recently worked with experts from other institutions to develop a vaccine that would be effective against melanoma a type of skin cancer when administered in conjunction with other therapies according to prof dale boger who coled the research with nobel laureate bruce beutler `` this cotherapy produced a complete response a curative response in the treatment of melanoma '' these promising results are reported in a study paper now published in the journal pnas experimental approach fully successful the researchers tested three different therapy options in a mouse model of aggressive melanoma all of the mice received a type of cancer immunotherapy known as antipdl1 but in addition to this they also received different vaccine variants prof boger and team split the mice into three groups one group had the cancer vaccine another group had the vaccine plus a molecule called diprovocim and the third group had the cancer vaccine and another adjuvant a chemical known as alum melanoma immunotherapy for brain metastases doubles survival researchers register fresh successes for immunotherapy against metastatic melanoma read now diprovocim is an adjuvant compound that boosts therapy by reinforcing the immune response this compound is particularly attractive to researchers developing new therapies because it is easy to synthesize and modify the researchers found that the eight mice that received the vaccine plus diprovocim treatment in addition to the antipdl1 therapy had a 100 percent survival rate over 54 days in comparison the rodents that received the immunotherapy plus the vaccine only did not survive those that received antipdl1 plus the vaccine with alum saw a 25 percent survival rate over the same period '' it was exciting to see the vaccine working simultaneously with a cancer immunotherapy like antipdl1 '' prof boger says vaccine also prevents recurrence this however is not the only reason why the researchers were excited in fact the experimental vaccine has another positive effect namely protecting the body against tumor recurrence '' just as a vaccine can train the body to fight off external pathogens this vaccine trains the immune system to go after the tumor '' says prof boger the scientists found that when they tried to reintroduce melanoma tumors in the mice in the second experimental group `` it wouldnt take '' as prof boger puts it `` the animal is already vaccinated against it '' he explains when they conducted more experiments in the laboratory the researchers were able to establish that diprovocim boosts the immune response by `` prompting '' the immune system to produce tumorinfiltrating leukocytes a type of cell that attacks and eliminates cancer tumors prof boger and team also note that the vaccine plus diprovocim can be delivered quite easily since they do not have to be injected directly into a main cancer tumor in order to be effective instead the injection can be delivered intramuscularly it is given in two doses inoculated within 7 days from each other in the future the researchers want to keep experimenting with this vaccine and confirm whether it would be effective when delivered alongside other types of cancer therapy the two leading scientists involved in the recent study manage tollbridge therapeutics a medical research company that holds the patent for diprovocimyou may have taken ibuprofen today be it to ease a headache or alleviate back pain but there might be more to this common medication than pain relief a new paper suggests that a daily dose of ibuprofen could prevent alzheimers disease researchers say that ibuprofen could ward off alzheimers if taken every day led by dr patrick mcgeer who is the ceo of aurin biotech in canada the study describes how ibuprofen could reduce inflammation caused by an alzheimersrelated peptide the paper was recently published in the journal of alzheimers disease alzheimers disease is the most common form of dementia it is estimated that around 57 million adults in the united states are living with the disease this number is predicted to rise to almost 14 million by 2050 the search continues for the exact causes of alzheimers but a sticky protein called betaamyloid is believed to play a role in the disease betaamyloid can clump together and form `` plaques '' in the brain these plaques will interfere with brain cell communication which can lead to memory loss behavioral changes and many other symptoms characteristic of alzheimers disease in a study published last year dr mcgeer and colleagues revealed that a betaamyloid peptide known as amyloidbeta 42 abeta 42 is present in saliva as well as the brain and that levels of this peptide are higher in adults who are at greater risk of alzheimers based on those results the team suggests that a saliva test could be used to predict the risk of alzheimers disease years before symptoms arise '' what weve learned through our research '' reports dr mcgeer `` is that people who are at risk of developing alzheimers exhibit the same elevated abeta 42 levels as people who already have it moreover they exhibit those elevated levels throughout their lifetime so theoretically they could get tested anytime '' a true breakthrough in their paper the researchers claim that ibuprofen a widely used nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drug nsaid could prevent the development of alzheimers in people with high levels of abeta 42 dr mcgeer and team point to previous research that they conducted in which they suggested that abeta 42 triggers an inflammatory response can beets tackle alzheimers at its root a new study finds that a beetderived compound could help to treat alzheimers disease read now this response could be reduced by ibuprofen and other nsaids say the researchers which could stop alzheimers in its tracks the team says that identifying the risk of alzheimers through a saliva test would offer people the opportunity to prevent alzheimers development through a daily dose of ibuprofen '' knowing that the prevalence of clinical alzheimers disease commences at age 65 '' explains dr mcgeer `` we recommend that people get tested 10 years before at age 55 when the onset of alzheimers would typically begin '' '' if they exhibit elevated abeta 42 levels then that is the time to begin taking daily ibuprofen to ward off the disease '' dr patrick mcgeer he hails the saliva test as a `` true breakthrough '' because it `` points in a direction where alzheimers disease can eventually be eliminated '' however dr mcgeers claims have been met with some criticism daily ibuprofen recommendation premature dr doug brown chief policy and research officer at the alzheimers society in the united kingdom believes that it is far too soon to be recommending daily ibuprofen for alzheimers prevention '' population studies '' he says `` which gather large amounts of information from medical records from thousands of people have thrown up an idea that taking ibuprofen and other overthecounter antiinflammatories might be linked to a lower risk of dementia '' '' but results of clinical trials with these drugs have been disappointing so far '' '' the researchers suggestion in this paper that taking a daily antiinflammatory drug as soon as a positive result for dementia risk is shown by a saliva test is premature '' adds dr brown `` based on the evidence at the moment '' he also notes the risks of longterm nsaid use including intestinal bleeding and stomach ulcers nsaids may also interact with other medications such as warfarin and produce harmful effects '' we always recommend talking to your doctor before changing your medication '' dr brown saysdogs often hailed as humans best friends have been the topic of many scientific studies looking into how they might boost our wellbeing in this spotlight well explain how your friendly pup can benefit your health across the board learn just how dogs can contribute to our physical and emotional wellbeing according to the american society for the prevention of cruelty to animals aspca an estimated 78 million dogs are owned as pets in the united states it is unclear when dogs were first domesticated but a study published last year claims that at least in europe dogs were tamed 20000–40000 years ago it is likely that humans and dogs have shared a special bond of friendship and mutual support ever since at least the neolithic period but why has this bond been so longlasting of course these cousins of the wolves have historically been great at keeping us and our dwellings safe guarding our houses our cattle and our various material goods throughout history humans have also trained dogs to assist them with hunting or they have bred numerous quirkylooking species for their cuteness or elegance however dogs are also and might have always been truly valued companions famed for their loyalty and seemingly constant willingness to put a smile on their owners faces in this spotlight we outline the research that shows how our dogs make us happier more resilient when facing stress and physically healthier to name but a few ways in which these muchloved quadrupeds support our wellbeing how dogs keep you in good health many studies have suggested that having dogs as pets is associated with better physical health as reviews of the existing literature show these findings persist dogs force their owners to take daily exercise just last year medical news today reported on a study that showed that owning a dog reduces a persons risk of premature death by up to a third also researchers at the university of harvard in cambridge ma suggest that dog owners have a lower risk of heart disease why is that it is difficult to establish a causal relationship between owning a dog and enjoying better health however the benefits may appear thanks to a series of factors related to lifestyle adjustments that people tend to make after they decide to adopt a canine friend why you should talk to your dog learn how talking to your dog helps you bond read now the most prominent such lifestyle factor is physical activity there is no way around it if you own a dog you have to commit to twice daily walks and sometimes even more according to a paper published in the journal of physical activity and health dog owners are more likely to walk for leisure purposes than both nonpet owners and people who own pet cats the results were based on studying a cohort of 41514 participants from california some of whom owned dogs some of whom owned cats and some of whom did not have any pets moreover several recent studies including one from the university of missouri in columbia and another from glasgow caledonian university in the united kingdom found that adults aged 60 and over enjoy better health thanks to the `` enforced '' exercise they get by walking their dogs '' over the course of a week this additional time spent walking may in itself be sufficient to meet world health organization recommendations of at least 150 minutes of moderate to vigorous physical activity '' philippa dall glasgow caledonian university dogs can strengthen our health not just as we grow older but also much much earlier than that before we are even born research published last year suggests that children who were exposed to dogs while still in the womb as their mothers spent time around dogs during pregnancy had a lower risk of developing eczema in early childhood also children exposed to certain bacteria carried by dogs also experienced a reduction of asthma symptoms the researchers noted dogs make people feel good perhaps the most intuitive benefit of sharing your life and home with a canine friend is that dogs give you `` feelgood vibes '' almost instantly dogs are often used as therapy animals because they have a calming effect on people it is really difficult not to cheer up even after a hard days work when you are greeted with often vocal enthusiasm by a friendly dog this researchers explain is due to the effect of the `` love hormone '' oxytocin '' during the last decades '' write the authors of a review that featured in frontiers in psychology `` animal assistance in therapy education and care has greatly increased '' when we interact with dogs our oxytocin levels shoot up since this is the hormone largely responsible for social bonding this hormonal `` love injection '' boosts our psychological wellbeing previous studies analyzed in the review have revealed that dog owners have more positive social interactions and that the presence of canine friends makes people more trustingand also more deserving of trust moreover dogs appear to reduce symptoms of depression and render people more resilient to stress that is why dogs are often used as therapy animals as researcher brian hare of duke university in durham nc noted in an interview for the washington post '' dogs make people feel good and their only job is to help people in stressful situations feel better '' researchers hypothesize that therapy dogs can improve the psychological wellbeing of children going through cancer therapy as well as help individuals diagnosed with posttraumatic stress disorder ptsd deal with disruptive symptoms or even prevent the onset of ptsd episodes what clinical research in dogs can teach us our canine companions could also give us clues and open new avenues of research when it comes to clinical research concerning our own health problems dogs share many diseases with humans by learning more about them we can also learn more about ourselves a study that mnt covered earlier this year reveals that dogs share certain metabolic conditions such as obesity with their human owners thus learning more about dogs gut microbiota and how they are affected by diet could help us understand how best to tackle our own eating habits like humans dogs can also develop some forms of cancer much like us dogs can get brain tumors to similarly destructive effect so learning which genes predispose our canine companions to gliomas may also be translated into cancer research for human patients moreover a contagious form of canine cancer could shed light into how forms of cancer found in humans have come to develop dogs can also experience certain features characteristic of dementia such as impaired problemsolving abilities researchers explain that by understanding how cognitive tasks are affected in these quadrupeds we may become better equipped to solve the riddle of dementia in the case of humans too '' dogs '' notes dr rosalind arden of the london school of economics and political science in the uk `` are one of the few animals that reproduce many of the key features of dementia '' '' so '' she goes on to add `` understanding their cognitive abilities could be valuable in helping us to understand the causes of this disorder in humans and possibly test treatments for it '' dogs are not just incredibly loveable and often very funny friends whose antics fuel the internets store of memes continuously their company also keeps us in good physical shape also their health problems sadly but endearingly often mirror our own most of all however we welcome them into our lives and have done so since time immemorial because they instantly bring us the sort of joy and calm that we would otherwise have to work hard to obtain author dean koontz summarized this perfectly in his memoir of his own muchloved dog '' one of the greatest gifts we receive from dogs is the tenderness they evoke in us by their delight in being with us the reliable sunniness of their disposition the joy they bring to playtime the curiosity with which they embrace each new experience dogs can melt cynicism and sweeten the bitter heart '' we picked linked items based on the quality of products and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you we partner with some of the companies that sell these products which means healthline uk and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a links abovenew research warns that a number of weight loss and workout supplements contain without accurately listing potentially harmful doses of a substance that has been ruled as unsafe a range of dietary supplements contain a substance that may harm you recently scientists looked into whether a range of supplements used as weight loss or workout aids may actually be harmful to those who take them the world antidoping agency wada ban all athletes from taking any drugs or supplements that include higenamine a beta2 agonist that may have toxic effects on the heart yet despite the fact that higenamine is banned by the wada and that it might be harmful to peoples cardiovascular health many dietary supplements still contain it as a substance that naturally occurs in certain plants such as aconite the researchers including john travis a senior research scientist at nsf international in ann arbor mi have revealed not only that higenamine is a widely used supplement ingredient but also that companies that produce such supplements do not properly list the dosage at which this ingredient is used '' were urging competitive and amateur athletes as well as general consumers to think twice before consuming a product that contains higenamine '' says travis '' beyond the doping risk for athletes '' he adds `` some of these products contain extremely high doses of a stimulant with unknown safety and potential cardiovascular risks when consumed '' '' what weve learned from the study is that there is often no way for a consumer to know how much higenamine is actually in the product they are taking '' john travis these findings now appear in the journal clinical toxicology concerning levels of harmful substance the researchers analyzed 24 supplements for weight loss or preworkout that listed higenamine also known as norcoclaurine and demethylcoclaurine and noticed that they featured widely varying and unreliable amounts of this substance the 24 products tested in the study were adrenal pump apidren betastim burnhc defcon1 second strike diablo dyno gnar pump higenamine high definition hypermax iburn2 liporidex max liporidex plus liporush ds2 no vate oxyshred prostunadvanced thermogenic pyroxamine razor8 ritual preworkout supplement stim shot thermovate and uplift probiotics does the evidence match the hype are probiotics really good for you read now worryingly of all the supplements that the researchers looked at only five products mentioned an exact quantity of higenamine however when the supplements were tested travis and his colleagues found that the listed quantities were incorrect actual quantities of higenamine across the range of products included anything from trace amounts to 62 milligrams per serving however based on the label instructions users may actually take up to 110 milligrams of the substance per day which may harm their health in unpredictable ways '' some plants such as ephedra contain stimulants if you take too much of the stimulants found in ephedra it can have lifethreatening consequences '' explains study coauthor dr pieter cohen '' similarly '' he adds `` higenamine is a stimulant found in plants when it comes to higenamine we dont yet know for certain what effect high dosages will have in the human body but a series of preliminary studies suggest that it might have profound effects on the heart and other organs '' according to a study published in the new england journal of medicine in 2015 about 23005 emergency department visits in the united states are related to supplement intake `` while higenamine is considered a legal dietary ingredient when present as a constituent of botanicals our research identified concerning levels of the stimulant and wildly inaccurate labeling and dosage information '' travis explains '' and as a wadaprohibited substance '' he continues `` any amount of higenamine in a dietary supplement should be of concern to the competitive athlete '' the study concludes that to better protect consumers the food and drug administration fda should now finalize their guidelines on supplement ingredients it also warns doctors that the higenamine quantities in many dietary supplements may impact cardiovascular healthblueberries are sometimes branded a `` superfood '' and for good reason they are packed full of antioxidants that offer a wealth of health benefits now a new study has uncovered another use for these little berries helping to treat cancer blueberry extract could help in the fight against cancer say researchers by studying human cervical cancer cell lines a team of researchers discovered that adding blueberry extract to radiation therapy can significantly improve treatment efficacy lead study author dr yujiang fang who works in the school of medicine at the university of missouricolumbia and colleagues recently reported their results in pathology and oncology research according to the american cancer society acs around 12820 new cases of cervical cancer will be diagnosed in the united states this year and more than 4200 women are expected to die from the disease radiation therapy remains a primary treatment for cervical cancer it involves using highenergy radiation to destroy cancer cells '' for some cancers such as late stage cervical cancer radiation is a good treatment option '' says dr fang `` however collateral damage to healthy cells always occurs '' for their study the researchers set out to determine whether or not blueberry extract could be used as a radiosensitizer which is a compound that makes cancer cells more vulnerable to radiation therapy the researchers explain that the blueberry extract does not only make cancer cells more sensitive to radiation but it also reduces the abnormal cell growth that fuels cancer development '' cancer cells avoid death by remodeling themselves '' continues dr fang `` along with reducing cell proliferation the extract also tricks cancer cells into dying so it inhibits the birth and promotes the death of cancer cells '' while further studies are needed the researchers say that their findings indicate that blueberries may be a promising treatment strategy for cervical cancer and other cancer types '' blueberries are very common and found all over the world they are readily accessible and inexpensive as a natural treatment option for boosting the effectiveness of existing therapies i feel they would be enthusiastically accepted '' dr yujiang fangdo you want to improve your mind in 2018 we have compiled the best methods to boost brain power improve memory build new neural connections ignite learning and enhance cognitive function if you would like to improve your mind in 2018 we have five tips to help you humans have brain plasticity or neuroplasticity which is the ability of the brain to change for better or worse at any age this flexibility of the brain plays a significant role in the development or decline of our brains and how our distinct personalities are shaped neural connections can be forged or severed and gray matter can thicken or shrink these changes reflect transformations in our abilities for example learning a new skill can wire new neural pathways in our brains while aging may weaken certain neural pathways that once existed and result in our memories not performing as well as they once did the american heart associationamerican stroke association have recently developed seven steps that aim to help individuals keep their brains healthy from childhood into old age they advise people to get regular exercise eat a healthful diet maintain a healthy weight control cholesterol regulate blood sugar levels manage blood pressure quit smoking in addition to following these guidelines medical news today provide five steps to reach optimal brain health and improve your mind for the year ahead 1 get physically active from childhood through adulthood and into old age physical activity has been shown time and time again to benefit brain health taking a brisk walk before an exam or test could enhance your performance physical activity affects childrens brain structure from an early age which in turn affects their academic performance researchers discovered that children who are physically fit tend to have more gray matter in the frontal subcortical and temporal brain regions as well as in the calcarine cortex these areas are all essential for executive function and motor learning and visual processes exercise has been demonstrated to improve memory and thinking ability among older adults with mild cognitive impairment aerobic exercise in particular was shown to increase brain volume in most gray matter regions including those that support shortterm memory and improve cognitive function scientists have indicated that even short bouts of physical activity may have a positive effect on the brain taking part in 20 minutes of highintensity interval training for 6 weeks has been associated with improvements in highinterference memory which allows us to differentiate between our car and one of the same make model and color for example the research also found that levels of brainderived neurotrophic factor a protein involved in the function growth and survival of brain cells was greater in individuals who experienced greater fitness gains from interval training other research revealed that a onetime 10minute burst of exercise temporarily boosts areas of the brain responsible for focus decisionmaking and problemsolving this suggests that right before a cognitively demanding task such as an exam test or interview performance may be improved by a brisk walk or cycle and if you happen to prefer a more gentle form of exercise practicing 25 minutes of hatha yoga or mindfulness meditation each day has been associated with improvements in the brains executive functions and cognitive abilities as well as the ability to regulate kneejerk emotional responses 2 eat a brainboosting mediterranean diet the mediterranean is the home to sun sea and foods known to have brainboosting properties eating pistachios could improve cognitive processing and learning the mediterranean diet is rich in vegetables fruits whole grains beans nuts seeds and olive oil it also includes moderate amounts of dairy fish and wine while red meat poultry and processed foods are limited research discovered that people who follow a mediterranean diet might have longterm brain protection study participants who consumed a mediterranean diet retained more brain volume over 3 years than those not following the diet eating a mediterranean diet has also been shown to slow down the rate of cognitive decline and is linked with improved brain function in older adults a study that focused on the impact of eating nuts on the brain found that regular nut consumption strengthens brainwave frequencies that are related to cognition learning memory healing and other vital brain functions cognitive ability genes identified this study uncovered 70 new genes related to cognitive ability read now the research team tested almonds cashews pecans pistachios and walnuts although peanuts are actually legumes they were still included in the study some types of nut were found to stimulate specific brain frequencies more than others pistachios seemed to generate the highest gamma wave response while peanuts produced the most significant delta response gamma wave response is tied to information retention learning cognitive processing and perception and delta wave response is linked to natural healing and healthy immunity 3 expand cognitive abilities with training brain training has had mixed results in studies while some research has shown that brain training improves memory and cognitive ability other studies report that there is little evidence to support claims that braintraining programs improve everyday cognitive performance mastering the memory of loci training method could expand your memory capacity recent papers have determined that the type of brain exercise is an important factor in the outcome of braintraining sessions research that was led by radboud university medical center in nijmegen the netherlands found that not only is supersized memory ability trainable but it is also longlasting individuals with typical memory skills used a strategic memory improvement technique known as memory of loci training for 30 minutes each day for 40 days the participants went from recalling around 26 words from a list of 72 to remembering 62 words so the training more than doubled their memory capacity improvements in recall were observed for at least 4 months after training the memory of loci is a mnemonic device that uses familiar objects in a room or landmarks on a journey to visualize memorize and recall an unlimited amount of information in a fixed order 4 learn a new language in addition to brain training another method you can use to give your brain a workout is to learn a new language or several foreign languages learning foreign languages ignites cognitive abilities in infants benefits the aging brain and sharpens the mind learn one or many foreign languages to slow down cognitive decline researchers at the higher school of economics in moscow russia as well as the university of helsinki in finland report that learning foreign languages enhances the elasticity of the brain and its capacity to code information they explain that the more languages a person learns the faster their neural network reacts to process the accumulated data other research which was led by the university of edinburgh in the united kingdom revealed that speaking two or more languages might slow down the cognitive decline associated with aging even if the other languages are learned during adulthood 5 study a musical instrument regardless of whether you study a musical instrument during childhood or adulthood unleashing your inner mozart will have a beneficial effect on your brain studying a musical instrument helps to protect the brain exposure to music at a young age contributes to improved brain development establishes neural networks and stimulates existing tracts in the brain receiving musical training as a child has been demonstrated to prevent the deterioration of speech listening skills in later years and may ward off agerelated cognitive decline a study that was published in the journal of neuroscience uncovered the reason why playing a musical instrument might have a protective effect on the brain the scientists found that playing sounds on an instrument changes brain waves in such a way that rapidly improves listening and hearing skills the altered brain activity illustrates that the brain can rewire itself and compensate for disease or injuries that may get in the way of a persons ability to perform tasks learning a physical task with music has also been shown to increase structural connectivity between the areas of the brain that are responsible for processing sounds and controlling movement adding just a few of these activities to your weekly schedule will enhance your mind and give your brain a boost if you only have time to fit one brainenriching task into your week we recommend getting out for a brisk walk physical activity has no end of benefits for your body and mindcoconut oil has been all the rage for some time endorsed by a number of celebrities as a superfood this tropicalsmelling fat often liberally applied to our skin and scalps is a favorite of many but the question remains is it healthful or not are the health claims that adorn coconut oil based on fact or fiction fat suffered a bad reputation for a long time and we were told to opt for lowfat options instead but the tides turned eventually prompting us to see fats in a new light our lives became simpler we learned how to avoid bad saturated and hydrogenated fats and eat good unsaturated ones to keep our tickers and arteries healthy then the humble coconut came along in 2003 and the waters were once again muddied seen by some as a superfood but recently labeled by the american heart association aha as part of the pool of unhealthful fats the controversy goes on so what are the scientific facts behind the coconut oil hype and what are the latest developments secret ingredient mediumchain fatty acids many of the purported health claims surrounding coconut oil stem from research published in 2003 by mariepierre stonge phd a professor of nutritional medicine at columbia university in new york city ny prof stonge found that in overweight women consumption of mediumchain fatty acids such as those found in coconut oil led to an increase in energy expenditure and fat oxidation compared with women who ate longchain or saturated fatty acids but prof stonge used a specially formulated fat diet in her study not coconut oil and she never claimed that coconut oil was the secret to the results seen in her research the rumor mill had begun to spin and coconut oil became widely hailed as a superfood in fact a 2009 study involving 40 women showed that 30 milliliters of coconut oil consumed daily for a 12week period increased good highdensity lipoprotein hdl levels accompanied by a reduction in waist circumference as more studies have followed the picture became less clearcut aha and who advise to limit consumption despite the number of studies casting coconut oil in a favorable light the aha issued an advisory note on dietary fats and cardiovascular disease in june 2017 recommending that we replace saturated fats with more healthful unsaturated fats this includes coconut oil as the world health organization who state `` unsaturated fats eg found in fish avocado nuts sunflower canola and olive oils are preferable to saturated fats eg found in fatty meat butter palm and coconut oil cream cheese ghee and lard '' the reason saturated fat is bad for our cardiovascular health however there is another twist to this fascinating tale coconut oil for sunburn does it work could sunburn be relieved using coconut oil read now while lowdensity lipoprotein ldl is generally thought of as `` bad '' cholesterol the hdl type is widely accepted as being its `` healthful '' counterpart yet in 2017 we covered three studies that potentially turn what we know about fats and cholesterol on its head the first strudy found that saturated fats may not `` clog '' our arteries after all while the second one uncovered a link between `` good '' hdl and mortality the third study published in november 2017 showed that high levels of hdl may not protect us from heart disease as previously thought what is the latest one of the problems with the controversy surrounding coconut oil is the lack of goodquality largescale human studies but adding to the body of evidence is a new study by the bbcs `` trust me im a doctor '' team together with dr kaytee khaw a professor of clinical gerontology and dr nita gandhi forouhi a professor of population health and nutrition both at the university of cambridge in the united kingdom the team compared the effects of coconut oil olive oil and butter in 94 human volunteers each study participant was asked to consume 50 grams of one of these fats daily for 4 weeks the results came as a surprise those who consumed coconut oil saw a 15 percent increase in hdl levels while this number only stood at 5 percent for olive oil which is accepted as being good for our cardiovascular system if we are working on the premise that hdl is good then these results speak in favor of coconut oil it is important to note however that the results of this study have not been peerreviewed and must be treated as preliminary coconut oil the verdict so is coconut oil healthful or not as with many research areas there is no straightforward answer if you are looking to lose weight its worth bearing in mind that coconut oil is very high in saturated fat and one tablespoon contains 120 calories if its cardiovascular health that you are after the official party line drawn by the aha and who still puts coconut oil on the list of fats to limit but who knows maybe the tables will turn and new guidelines will emerge in the meantime coconut oil can be part of a healthful balanced diet if consumed in moderation however its worth looking out for coconut oil in packaged foods especially partially hydrogenated coconut oil this is a source of trans fats which the food and drug administration fda say increase the risk of heart diseasegroundbreaking research shows for the first time how the most wellknown genetic risk factor for alzheimers disease causes signs in human brain cells also the scientists managed to correct the gene and erase its harmful effects scientists fix the faulty gene that most likely causes alzheimers the complex role of the apolipoprotein apoe gene in the development of alzheimers has been studied extensively for instance researchers know that having one copy of the apoe4 gene variant raises the risk of alzheimers by two to three times and having two copies of this genetic variant puts people at a 12fold higher risk normally apoes role is to provide instructions for creating the protein of the same name in combination with fats apoe creates lipoproteins which help to transport and regulate levels of cholesterol throughout our bloodstream however the e4 version of the gene seems to be particularly damaging to the brain with several studies showing that this genetic variant increases the risk of toxic amyloid beta and tau buildup but why is that what makes the e4 variant of this gene so much more harmful than other variants researchers at the gladstone institutes in san francisco ca wanted to find out their findings have just been published in the journal nature medicine apoe4 studied in human cells for first time more specifically the researchers wanted to locate and understand the fine yet crucial difference between the e3 and e4 variants that makes the apoe4 gene so devastating is it a case the researchers wondered of the e4 variant making apoe3 lose some of its functions or is it the case that more apoe4 has toxic effects alzheimers this antibody may halt brain injury apoetargeting antibodies halved the amount of toxic plaques in mices brains read now lead investigator dr yadong huang a professor of neurology and pathology at the university of california san francisco explains the importance of this question '' its fundamentally important '' he says `` to address this question because it changes how you treat the problem if the damage is caused due to the loss of a proteins function you would want to increase protein levels to supplement those functions '' '' but if the accumulation of a protein leads to a toxic function you want to lower production of the protein to block its detrimental effect '' to find out the researchers modeled the disease in human cells examining the effect of apoe4 on human brain cells for the first time dr huang explains why changing the disease model was in itself a huge step for alzheimers research '' many drugs '' he explains `` work beautifully in a mouse model but so far theyve all failed in clinical trials one concern within the field has been how poorly these mouse models really mimic human disease '' of mice and humans study finds differences applying stem cell technology to skin cells from people with alzheimers who had two copies of the apoe4 gene dr huang and his team created neurons the researchers also created brain cells using skin cells from people who didnt have alzheimers and had two copies of the apoe3 gene the scientists found that in human brain cells the apoe4 protein has a `` pathogenic conformation '' meaning that it has an abnormal form that prevents it from functioning properly leading to a series of diseasecausing problems namely `` apoe4expressing neurons had higher levels of tau phosphorylation '' the authors write which was `` unrelated to their increased production of amyloidbeta peptides and they displayed gabaergic neuron degeneration '' importantly they also found that `` apoe4 increased amyloidbeta production in human but not in mouse neurons '' '' theres an important species difference in the effect of apoe4 on amyloid beta '' explains first study author chengzhong wang '' increased amyloid beta production is not seen in mouse neurons and could potentially explain some of the discrepancies between mice and humans regarding drug efficacy this will be very important information for future drug development '' chengzhong wang correcting the faulty gene next dr huang and team wanted to see whether it was the loss of apoe3 or the accumulation of apoe4 that caused the disease so they compared neurons that did not produce either the e3 or the e4 variant of the protein with cells that had apoe4 added to them the former continued to behave normally while adding apoe4 led to alzheimerslike pathologies this confirmed the fact that it is the presence of the apoe4 that causes the disease as a final step dr huang and his team looked for ways in which to fix the faulty gene to this end they applied a previously developed apoe4 `` structure corrector '' the socalled structure corrector has been shown in previous research led by the same dr huang to change the structure of apoe4 so that it looks and behaves more like the inoffensive apoe3 applying this compound to human apoe4 neurons corrected the defects thereby eliminating signs of the disease restoring normal cell function and helping the cells to live longer the researchers conclude '' treatment of apoe4expressing neurons with a smallmolecule structure corrector ameliorated the detrimental effects thus showing that correcting the pathogenic conformation of apoe4 is a viable therapeutic approach for apoe4related alzheimers disease ''you wake up in the middle of the night convinced that an evil figure is lying in wait you attempt to move but your body just will not budge you try to scream but nothing comes out the monster draws closer it may sound like a horror movie scene but this is the real deal youre experiencing sleep paralysis sleep paralysis is like a waking nightmare and the underlying causes for this condition remain unclear this terrifying and mysterious sleep disorder or parasomnia has been experienced by people possibly since the dawn of humankind and it may have given rise to numerous ghost stories and mysterious accounts involving `` things that go bump in the night '' this most unsettling experience was first clearly documented in a medical treatise in the 17th century by dutch physician isbrand van diembroeck who wrote about the case of a woman `` 50 years of age in good plight health strong '' yet who complained of mysterious experiences at night '' when she was composing her self to sleep '' explains van diembroeck `` sometimes she believed the devil lay upon her and held her down sometimes that she was choked by a great dog or thief lying upon her breast so that she could hardly speak or breathe and when she endeavored to throw off the burden she was not able to stir her members '' what the woman in van dimbroecks account likely experienced was a condition that has come to be known as `` sleep paralysis '' researchers define it as `` a common generally benign parasomnia characterized by brief episodes of inability to move or speak combined with waking consciousness '' sleep paralysis and hallucinations the reason why sleep paralysis is so scary is not just because you will suddenly become alert but realize that you are in fact unable to move a muscle or utter a sound but also because this experience is often as in the case above accompanied by terrifying hallucinations these as specialized literature has now ascertained typically fall into three distinct categories a sensed presence or intruder hallucinations in which the person feels the presence of an evil threatening individual incubus hallucinations in which the person might feel someone or something pressing down uncomfortably even painfully on their chest or abdomen or trying to choke them vestibularmotor hallucinations during which the individual thinks that they are floating flying or moving these may also sometimes include outofbody experiences in which a person thinks that their spirit or mind has left their body and is moving and observing events from above among the types of dreamlike hallucinations listed above the first type a sensed presence is one of the most commonly experienced by people with sleep paralysis as for the time of sleep at which sleep paralysis with or without hallucinations normally takes place again there is no single answer according to a study that was published in the journal of sleep research sleep paralysis typically happens soon after falling asleep or hypnagogic episodes at some point during the course of sleep or hypnomesic episodes or a little before the persons usual time of awakening or hypnopompic episodes the authors of that study note that the most common instances of sleep paralysis are hypnomesic and that they usually take place after 1–3 hours from falling asleep a strange shadowy man in fact these visions and sensations can seem so realistic to many people that they may think that they are having a paranormal experience or even being subjected to strange tests and rituals the most common hallucination linked to sleep paralysis is the sensed presence of a sinister figure '' witness accounts '' of such hallucinations can be truly unsettling and a number of longtime experients such as louid proud in his book dark intrusions have offered detailed accounts of years of uncanny nightly encounters one person who told me about his nightmarish hallucinations said he felt as if `` someone knelt on his chest so that it felt as if he was being choked out '' another person spoke of a nighttime assailant that takes pleasure in tormenting her in myriad ways '' when sleep paralysis strikes i get both visual and auditory hallucinations which most often involve a strange shadowy man coming up my stairs and into my bedroom occasionally hell prod or tickle me '' often she told me this sinister figure even `` coopts '' her partner in his mischief '' sometimes '' she says `` ill even hallucinate my partner lying next to me and laughing maliciously at me or siding with the shadowy figure in annoying me this is very frustrating since all i want him to do is help me '' given the intensity of these hallucinatory experiences it may come as no surprise that researchers have repeatedly argued that hallucinations linked with sleep paralysis can be held responsible for many reports of magical events sightings of ghouls and demons and alien abductions some happy exceptions although usually people with sleep paralysis report experiencing terrifying hallucinations a happy few actually point to a state of bliss that makes them look forward to these episodes a study that was conducted by james allan cheyne from the university of waterloo in ontario canada suggests that the people who most often describe experiencing positive feelings and sensations during an episode of sleep paralysis are those who are prone to vestibularmotor hallucinations '' these hallucinations were found to involve feelings of floating and outofbody experiences which are associated with feelings of bliss rather than fear '' james allan cheyne '' in contrast to the otheroriented nature of the intruder and incubus hallucinations '' he adds `` these experiences are very much focused on the experients own person '' sometimes cheyne continues feelings of bliss during sleep paralysis are derived from pleasant erotic sensations that arise from vestibularmotor hallucinations what is the underlying mechanism so what happens in the body during an episode of sleep paralysis essentially during the dream phase of sleep known as the rapid eye movement rem phase our skeletal muscles are paralyzed the reasons behind this are not fully understood though researchers have been making progress in uncovering the mechanisms attached to this process insomnia why your brain may sleep without even knowing it people who have insomnia may actually fall asleep for short stretches of time without realizing it how come they dont know it happens read now one popular theory posits that this temporary state of paralysis is meant to prevent us from hurting ourselves perhaps in automatic response to some violent dream during sleep paralysis paradoxically our brains or parts of our brains become awake and conscious but the rest of the body is still immobilized at the same time during sleep paralysis many people experience dream visions and sensations as though they were real hence the hallucinations and the fact that they are in fact partly awake and conscious blurs the line between reality and dreams who is at risk of sleep paralysis sleep paralysis is more common than we may think a 2016 study declares that it is `` surprisingly common '' but that `` determining accurate prevalence rates is complicated '' because researchers and study participants alike have different understandings of what counts as sleep paralysis although a fair amount of research has been conducted in this respect it remais unclear as to who is most at risk of sleep paralysis a recent review of the available data however suggests that 76 percent of the population have experienced at least one episode throughout their lives that said the numbers may be even higher what causes sleep paralysis and what the main risks are for experiencing such an episode remain largely mysterious sleep paralysis is a common symptom of the neurological disorder `` narcolepsy '' which is characterized by uncontrollable sleepiness throughout the waking day but many people who experience sleep paralysis do so independently of neurological conditions and to distinguish between narcolepsyrelated episodes and independently occurring sleep paralysis specialists usually refer to the latter as `` isolated sleep paralysis '' recurrent isolated sleep paralysis often starts in adolescence and around 283 percent of students apparently experience it moreover people with poor `` sleep hygiene '' for instance those who sleep too much or too little may also be more likely to experience sleep paralysis the authors of a systematic review published in sleep medicine reviews note '' specifically excessively short fewer than 6 hours or long over 9 hours sleep duration and napping especially long naps over 2 hours were associated with increased odds of sleep paralysis '' '' long selfreported sleep latency how long it takes to fall asleep over 30 minutes and difficulty initiating sleep were related to an increased likelihood of reporting sleep paralysis '' they add are mental health issues to blame given the frightening nature of the most of the hallucinations associated with sleep paralysis many have wondered whether individuals experiencing mental health issues such as depression or anxiety are more susceptible to these experiences the results of existing research however are mixed some have argued that individuals who have experienced abuse in early life whether or not they remember it may be more exposed to sleep paralysis according to the study that was published in sleep medicine reviews `` levels of waking state dissociative experiences involving depersonalisation derealisation and amnesia were found to be related to both sleep paralysis frequency and the frequencyintensity of all three hallucination types '' but links to other neurological and psychiatric disorders are more uncertain the authors of a study that was published in the journal consciousness and cognition note that previous research has tried to make a case that bipolar disorder posttraumatic stress disorder depression panic disorder and generalized anxiety disorder to name but a few may play a role in sleep paralysis however they report that their analysis of the available data has revealed `` no general relationship between isolated sleep paralysis and major psychopathology '' instead they decided to focus on the most common `` symptom '' of sleep paralysis that is sensed presence hallucinations that induce a feeling of fear and explained that there may be a link between it and what they call `` passive social imagery '' passive social imagery refers to the experience of individuals who are prone to being more socially anxious and to imagining themselves in embarrassing or distressing social situations as the passive victim on the receiving end of abuse these individuals the researchers suggest appear to be more at risk of experiencing distress due to sensed presence hallucinations what can you do to prevent it prevention and coping strategies for sleep paralysis are unfortunately mostly anecdotal but there are some methods that seem to have been repeatedly validated by many individuals who say that they usually or often work for them these include trying not to fall asleep on on your back since studies have associated episodes of sleep paralysis with lying on ones back when going to sleep trying to ensure on a regular basis that your sleep will not be disrupted since repeatedly waking up during the night has been flagged up as a potential risk factor avoiding overuse of stimulants such as tobacco and alcohol coffee surprisingly has not been deemed risky in this context though the evidence that these affect the chances of experiencing sleep paralysis is mixed learning meditation and muscle relaxation techniques may help you to better cope with the experience persisting in the attempt `` to move extremities '' such as fingers or toes during sleep paralysis also seems to help disrupt the experience finally if you regularly experience sleep paralysis with `` sensed presence '' and you think that this may be related to other experiences of anxiety in your daytoday life then it may be worth considering cognitive behavioral therapy according to the authors of the consciousness and cognition study there is a distinct `` possibility that frightening isolated sleep paralysis sensed presence experiences may contribute to maintenance of an individuals negative social imagery biases '' if that is the case they argue `` cognitive behavioral treatment of these experiences could help to alleviate the more general social imagery dysfunction '' which may improve the overall situation we picked linked items based on the quality of products and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you we partner with some of the companies that sell these products which means healthline uk and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a links aboveboth swine flu and bird flu created a stir in recent years now a new threat may be on the horizon a new study demonstrates that the influenza virus can jump from pigs to canines canine influenza viruses are growing in number usually influenza pandemics are sparked when a virus jumps from birds to pigs and then eventually to humans influenza viruses in an animal population where there are many viral strains in one place can mix together to create new forms when new strains jump to humans our immune systems which have no experience of these unknown pathogens fail to protect us for instance the 2009 h1n1 pandemic was caused by a virus that began in birds then it moved into pigs where it picked up new genes from flu viruses already present in swine before leaping into humans generally birds and swine are considered the most dangerous melting pots for the influenza virus viruses in dogs and horses seem to have much less viral genetic diversity influenza and dogs although much less common 15 years ago researchers documented an influenza virus that had entered a horse before jumping into a canine this became the first circulating canine influenza virus then just 5 years ago a canine influenza virus of avian origin was discovered in farmed dogs in china a new study published this week in the journal mbio moves the story on another step how to avoid catching the flu although complete immunity cant be guaranteed here are some tips that might protect you from getting sick read now the scientists who are based at the center for research on influenza pathogenesis icahn school of medicine at mount sinai in new york city ny looked in detail at the genomes of 16 influenza viruses from dogs in southern chinas guangxi autonomous region the viruses were detected in dogs that attended veterinary clinics due to respiratory problems the authors explain their findings and their importance '' what we have found is another set of viruses that come from swine that are originally avian in origin and now they are jumping into dogs and have been reassorted with other viruses in dogs '' '' we now have h1n1 h3n2 and h3n8 in dogs they are starting to interact with each other this is very reminiscent of what happened in swine 10 years before the h1n1 pandemic '' next steps and new concerns this new virus that the researchers found is h1n1 but it is distinct from the strain that caused the previous epidemic to the next step will be to test the virus on human serum '' if there is a lot of immunity against these viruses '' says investigator dr adolfo garcíasastre `` they will represent less of a risk but we now have one more host in which influenza virus is starting to have a diverse genotypic and phenotypic characteristics creating diversity in a host which is in very close contact to humans '' it may be that humans already have protection against this particular strain but that does not take the concern away entirely '' the diversity in dogs has increased so much now that the type of combinations of viruses that can be created in dogs represent potential risk for a virus to jump to a dog into a human '' dr adolfo garcíasastre in the united states whenever avian flu is detected in a population of birds they are culled this would be an unpopular solution if the virus was to infect domestic dogs dr garcíasastre says `` there are attempts to restrict influenza virus in pigs through vaccination and one could consider vaccination for dogs '' hopefully interventions of that nature wont be necessary but only time will tell whether dog flu could become a serious reason for concernscientists in the united kingdom and china find that a new drug for type 2 diabetes may protect the brain from damage caused by alzheimers disease after testing it in mice could a diabetes drug help to treat alzheimers disease in a new paper published in the journal brain research the researchers explain how the `` tripleaction '' drug resulted in a significant reversal of memory loss in mice that were genetically engineered to develop humanlike alzheimers disease the new drug `` holds clear promise of being developed into a new treatment for chronic neurodegenerative disorders such as alzheimers disease '' says study leader christian hölscher a professor in the faculty of health and medicine at lancaster university in the uk alzheimers is a brainwasting disease that accounts for 50–75 percent of cases of dementia which is a condition wherein people gradually lose their ability to think remember make decisions hold a conversation and look after themselves as the disease progresses the brain undergoes biological and chemical changes and particular areas shrink as nerve cells or neurons die the exact causes of alzheimers are currently unknown but microscopic examinations of affected brain tissue have revealed two hallmarks abnormal accumulations of protein segments known as `` plaques '' and `` tangles '' current treatments make no real difference the number of people with alzheimers disease is rising rapidly as the population ages in 2015 there were an estimated 468 million people worldwide living with dementia and this number is expected to reach more than 130 million in 2050 in the united states where alzheimers is currently the sixth leading cause of death there are an estimated 5 million people living with alzheimers disease this is expected to rise to 16 million by 2050 accompanied by a significant rise in costs to the us the cost of alzheimers and other causes of dementia in 2017 was estimated to be $ 259 billion and is expected to rise to $ 11 trillion by 2050 at present there is no cure for alzheimers disease and there are also no treatments that make a significant difference to the symptoms drug raises activity of three growth factors type 2 diabetes is a disease that results from insulin resistance a condition in which cells become less sensitive to insulin and therefore less able to take in glucose from the bloodstream to use as energy the pancreas makes more insulin to compensate but eventually it will be unable to keep up and blood glucose levels will rise leading to prediabetes diabetes and other health problems could an existing oxygen therapy treat alzheimers learn how hyperbaric oxygen therapy might alleviate some physical and behavioral symptoms of alzheimers read now the drug that prof hölscher and his group tested in the new study is a `` triple receptor agonist '' that activates the proteins that allow signals from three growth factors called glucagonlike peptide1 glucosedependent insulinotropic polypeptide and glucagon to enter cells previous studies have revealed that type 2 diabetes is a risk factor for alzheimers and problems with growth factor signaling have been detected in the brains of people with the disease the new study is the first to show that a triple receptor agonist may protect the brain from the progressive brain damage that occurs in alzheimers disease consistent neuroprotective effects the researchers tested the drug on aged appps1 mice whose brains were in the advanced stages of degeneration appps1 mice are engineered `` transgenic mice '' that carry versions of human genes that are linked to an inherited form of alzheimers in a maze learning test the treated mice showed improved memory formation also examination of their brain tissue showed a reduction in amyloid plaques inflammation and oxidative stress treated mice showed higher rates of new nerve cell generation and celltocell connections and increased levels of a growth factor called brainderived neurotrophic factor which protects nerve cells '' these very promising outcomes '' says prof hölscher `` demonstrate the efficacy of these novel multiplereceptor drugs that originally were developed to treat type 2 diabetes but have shown consistent neuroprotective effects in several studies '' he notes that clinical studies that used an older version of the same type of drug have already shown `` very promising results in people with alzheimers disease or with mood disorders '' the researchers believe that their findings point to a `` promising '' direction in which to look for new treatments for alzheimers disease '' here we show that a novel triple receptor drug shows promise as a potential treatment for alzheimers but further doseresponse tests and direct comparisons with other drugs have to be conducted in order to evaluate if this new drug is superior to previous ones '' prof christian hölscheranhedonia or the inability to feel pleasure during pleasurable activities occurs as a part of a number of conditions it is also considered a central feature of depression in this spotlight feature we explore whats happening in the brain anhedonia accompanies a range of neuropsychiatric conditions most people will at some point in their life lose interest in things that used to excite them anhedonia however takes this loss to its limits it becomes impossible to draw enjoyment from things that once elicited excitement such as music sex food and conversation aside from major depressive disorder it can occur as part of other conditions including schizophrenia psychosis and parkinsons disease as well as anorexia nervosa and substance abuse disorders it may even play a part in an individuals desire to indulge in risky behaviors such as skydiving over recent years anhedonia has received increased attention part of the reason for this is that it predicts how well someone with depression will respond to treatment common antidepressants tend to work less well for people who have depression with anhedonia than for those who have depression without anhedonia because treating depression is so challenging any additional insight is welcome there is evidence to suggest that the presence of anhedonia increases the risk of committing suicide so if the link is proven recognizing and dealing with anhedonia could save lives what does anhedonia feel like to gain a better understanding of what anhedonia feels like the following is an excerpt from a firsthand account '' for the past 7 years i have had the smallest flickering of emotions what i feel on a daily basis is practically nil i have no desires to truly speak of as nothing i do is rewarding or satisfying this is the core of my anhedonia a symptom of major depression '' '' essentially i gain nothing from my daily life my world is cold and as such it makes life seem the same way everything i look at everything i do looks and feels the same '' whats happening in the brain as with the investigation of any emotional response the story is not a simple one the brains circuitry is dense convoluted and incredibly busy anhedonia is not simply a reduced appreciation of the taste of chocolate the underlying reward mechanisms are impaired this might involve alterations in levels of interest motivation anticipation expectation and effort prediction all of which are complex in their own right and all of which are processed by different but overlapping neural circuits anhedonia and reward there is evidence that many individuals with anhedonia can experience pleasure in a similar way to the rest of the population its just that there is something amiss as far as motivation anticipation and reward are concerned anhedonia seems to interfere with reward mechanisms for people with anhedonia the reward process has come unhinged finding which part of this process has become unshackled is a difficult job in order to understand the interplay between the different aspects of pleasure i will relay an example if we experience something and enjoy it eating a new type of candy for instance we might want to do it again however if the candy costs $ 1000 per piece we might not bother or similarly if it is known to cause cancer we will probably give it a miss if the candy is free and safe however we will tuck in if we are required to walk to the next room to get a piece we will probably make the effort but if it is stationed half a mile away we might pause for thought and if its in the next town we will forgo the pleasure but even if the candy is healthful placed on the table next to us and free of charge we might take a piece even if we have just eaten a threecourse meal desire motivation and the pleasure we derive from things are fluid although this particular example is simplistic it shows how our brains make computations about risks rewards and payoffs using multiple brain regions often without our conscious input with this in mind where should we start well for many years a part of the basal ganglia called the nucleus accumbens has been referred to as the `` pleasure center '' unsurprisingly it is implicated in anhedonia recent studies have shown that other brain areas are also involved including the prefrontal cortex which is involved in planning and personality expression the amygdala which processes emotions and is involved in decisionmaking the striatum which is the area that houses the nucleus accumbens implicated in the reward system the insula which is thought to be important in consciousness and selfawareness the prefrontal cortex seems important in highlevel processing of rewards including costbenefit analysis and decisionmaking its connections to the ventral striatum seem to be particularly important in motivation and therefore anhedonia the role of neurotransmitters neurotransmitter imbalances have also been investigated in relation to anhedonia dopamine is of particular interest due to its involvement in reward pathways as well as the fact that it is expressed in high quantities in the nucleus accumbens in fact reduced dopamine expression in the ventral striatum of depressed people was found to correlate well with anhedonia severity but not depressive symptoms overall dopamines relationship with anhedonia and reward is a complex one though reduced dopamine levels in different parts of the brain can have different effects linking depression insomnia and the brains reward center a study finds that increased activity in a brain region responsible for rewardrelated functions reduces the risk of depression related to sleep problems read now as an example increased dopamine in the insula has the opposite effect on effortbased decisionmaking to increased dopamine in the ventral striatum so dopamine is unlikely to tell the whole story gaba an inhibitory neurotransmitter glutamate an excitatory neurotransmitter serotonin and opioids may also play their part for instance people with depression who also have pronounced anhedonia seem to have reduced gaba levels and depressed people with reduced opioid activity experience less pleasure during positive interactions a possible role for inflammation depression and inflammation have been linked for some time scientists have measured increased levels of inflammatory compounds in people with depression these chemical hallmarks include cytokines and creactive proteins cytokines shown here may be involved in anhedonia a study of people with depression published in the journal molecular psychiatry in 2015 found that increased levels of creactive protein were associated with reduced connectivity between the ventral striatum and ventromedial prefrontal cortex which is important in motivation and increased anhedonia other studies have produced similar findings so inflammation appears to be involved in both depression and anhedonia although a link between anhedonia and inflammation seems perhaps unexpected it makes sense when one peels back the layers cytokines can influence neurotransmitter metabolism and brain activity also cytokines promote socalled sickness behavior including lethargy malaise loss of appetite sleepiness and sensitivity to pain all of which have parallels in depression and people who undergo cytokine treatment for cancer often report depressive symptoms although we do not have a full understanding of the origins of anhedonia the research to date tells us that it is multifaceted and quite possibly different from person to person treating anhedonia at present there are no treatments aimed at anhedonia it is commonly treated alongside the condition that it is part of for instance selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors are often prescribed for individuals with depression there is a growing body of evidence that standard depression treatments do little for anhedonia and worse still may add to the problem by causing emotional blunting sexual anhedonia and anorgasmia or the inability to orgasm this negative interaction might be because serotonin inhibits dopamine release in certain brain regions potentially interfering with the reward motivation and pleasure circuitry on a positive note there has been recent interest in the anesthetic ketamine as a potential antianhedonic medication ketamine has shown promise as a treatment for depression quickly reducing symptoms in both major depressive disorder and bipolar disorder a study that was published in the journal nature in 2014 specifically set out to see whether it could also have an effect on anhedonia trials in rodents had already generated interesting results but this was the first time that ketamine had been investigated in humans specifically the study looked at treatmentresistant bipolar disorder the authors concluded that `` ketamine rapidly reduced the levels of anhedonia '' in fact the reduction occurred within 40 minutes and lasted up to 14 days following a single injection interestingly the reduction occurred without a similar reduction in depressive symptoms ketamine blocks nmethyldaspartate receptors thereby preventing them from being activated by glutamate this infers that glutamate an excitatory neurotransmitter might play a role in anhedonia there is still a long way to go before the many strands of anhedonia are fully understood however our knowledge is slowly growing and with time there is hope of a solution to this highly intrusive and debilitating maladyresearchers have discovered a mechanism through which toxic protein clusters develop in the brain in parkinsons disease it may be treatable with drugs approved for another disease the buildup of toxic proteins in parkinsons disease could be halted with an already approved drug in a paper published in the journal neuron the scientists describe how they discovered that increasing a fatty substance or lipid called glucosylceramide causes a buildup of toxic clusters of alphasynuclein protein inside dopamineproducing brain cells the team also revealed that treatment with an already approved glucosylceramide synthase inhibitor a drug that reduces production of the lipid reduced the toxic protein clusters which are a hallmark of parkinsons disease '' some companies '' says senior study author joseph mazzulli an assistant professor of neurology at northwestern university feinberg school of medicine in chicago il `` have been using synthase inhibitors to reduce the synthesis of the lipid and we used a similar compound on patientderived neurons in our study '' '' we were able to show it reduced toxic alphasynuclein aggregation directly within neurons derived from parkinsons patients '' he adds parkinsons arises from dopamine cell death parkinsons disease is a progressive condition that arises from the death of cells in a brain region known as the substantia nigra the cells produce a chemical messenger called dopamine that is important for regulating movement the main symptoms of parkinsons disease are tremors slowness of movement and stiffness as well as reduced balance and coordination other symptoms include emotional changes sleep disruption depression difficulty speaking problems with swallowing and chewing and constipation parkinsons mostly strikes after the age of 60 although a small number of cases are diagnosed in those under the age of 50 as the symptoms worsen it gets harder to cope with everyday tasks and lead an independent life there are more than 10 million people living with parkinsons worldwide including around 1 million in the united states where approximately 60000 cases are diagnosed every year alone while there is as yet no cure for parkinsons disease there are drugs and other treatments that offer symptom relief for many patients gba1 mutations and parkinsons disease in the study paper prof mazzulli and team explain that a strong risk factor for the development of toxic alphasynuclein clusters in parkinsons is mutations in the glucocerebrosidase gba1 gene the gene produces a protein that is important for the correct functioning of lysosomes which are compartments inside cells that break down and clear away glucosylceramide and other lipids parkinsons disease how toxic proteins damage healthy brain cells a study reveals for the first time how toxic clumps of alphasynuclein drill holes in healthy brain cells to disrupt their function read now those with one mutated copy of gba1 have higherthannormal levels of the glucosylceramide and have a greater risk of developing parkinsons disease having two mutated copies of the gene one from each parent can lead to gauchers disease which is a rare disorder wherein lysosomes fail and fatty compounds build up in the body however although it is known that gba1 mutations are linked perhaps through the disruption of glucosylceramide clearance to the development of toxic alphasynuclein clusters what has not been clear until the new study is the mechanism behind it mutated gba1 may not be necessary to investigate the scientists tested the effects of a drug that raises levels of glucosylceramide in dopamineproducing neurons grown from patientderived stem cells the cells did not have mutated forms of the gba1 gene they discovered that even without the mutated gene there was a significant buildup of toxic alphasynuclein clusters in the neurons prof mazzulli suggests that this indicates that the conversion of normal alphasynuclein into its toxic form did not necessarily depend on `` the presence of the mutated gba1 protein but more importantly the decreased activity and accumulation of glucosylceramide '' complex alphasynuclein and toxic clusters on closer investigation of the conversion of alphasynuclein from its normal to toxic form the team discovered that it was not just the simple form of alphasynuclein as previously thought that converted into a toxic cluster instead glucosylceramide was directly converting the complex form of alphasynuclein into toxic clusters `` we were surprised to find that toxic aggregation occurred by direct conversion of the large alphasynuclein complex '' prof mazzulli explains '' we thought '' he continues `` that the complex would have to first disassemble before forming toxic aggregates but thats not what our data indicated '' he says that drugs devised for the treatment of gauchers disease might be one way to target this mechanism these findings also offer a way to measure how well drugs might perform in trials while the goal of parkinsons treatment is to reduce alphasynuclein clusters measuring levels of the toxic protein in living patients is not straightforward '' its far easier to measure the effects of therapeutics that alter glucosylceramide in patients since the lipid can be directly measured from easily accessible fluids such as blood or cerebral spinal fluid '' prof joseph mazzullia new study now published in the journal psychotherapy and psychosomatics has found a link between a common class of stomach drugs called proton pump inhibitors and depression the researchers suggest that the pills might lead to major depressive disorder by disrupting the guts bacteria common stomach drugs may trigger depression by disrupting the gutbrain axis suggests new research more and more studies are now pointing to the numerous ways in which our gut bacteria may influence both our mental and emotional wellbeing for instance researchers have found that germfree mice that had been deprived of beneficial gut bacteria displayed symptoms of anxiety depression and cognitive impairment since the bacteria in our gut can alter the function of our brain by producing certain hormones or neurotransmitters and emotional responses can in turn affect our gut bacteria it should come as no surprise that some studies have found a link between posttraumatic stress disorder and certain strains of bacteria other studies have not only pinpointed specific bacteria whose absence can trigger symptoms of depression in rodents but they have also shown that supplementing said bacteria can reverse signs of depression now an observational study suggests that proton pump inhibitors which are a class of drugs typically prescribed to treat acidrelated stomach conditions such as gastroesophageal reflux disease increase the risk of developing major depressive disorder this is the leading cause of disability both in the united states and worldwide the first author of the new study is weisheng huang from the department of psychiatry at the taipei veterans general hospital in taiwan stomach acid pills may disrupt gutbrain axis huang and team examined data on 2366 individuals who had been taking proton pump inhibitors and went on to develop depression and compared them with 9464 people who also took the drugs but did not develop depression the latter group of participants was `` matched for age sex enrollment time end point time and followup period '' antidepressants do they really work we take a critical look at the effectiveness of these commonly prescribed drugs read now the researchers applied logistic regression analysis and adjusted for various demographic factors as well as for psychiatric comorbidities such as anxiety and substance abuse disorders the study revealed that compared with those who did not develop major depressive disorder `` patients with major depression had a greater prevalence of higher cumulative defined daily dose '' of proton pump inhibitors specifically the risk of clinical depression increased for those who took the drugs pantoprazole lansoprazole and rabeprazole while in those who used omeprazole and esomeprazole `` only a trend significance was noted '' '' to our knowledge '' write the study authors `` this was the first study to investigate the association between proton pump inhibitor exposure and the risk of major depression '' while the mechanisms behind such an association remain mysterious the authors venture a couple of possible explanations the drugs might raise depression risk by dysregulating the gutbrain axis they suggest or by preventing the organism from properly absorbing nutrients after the use of stomach drugs still the researchers caution that physicians should continue to prescribe the drugs as and when needed bearing in mind the range of side effects that these drugs may have which include pneumonia bone fracture and gastrointestinal infections huang and team recommend that future studies investigate the pathophysiology behind the association they foundcolorectal cancer is quite common especially among the aging population an important risk factor for colorectal cancer is diet and dietary choices are also vital during and after treatment in this spotlight we give you an overview of which diets are best and which are best avoided what does a good diet for preventing colorectal cancer and for aiding cancer treatment look like colorectal cancer is a type of cancer that affects a persons rectum colon or both this is also known as the large intestine according to the american cancer society acs 2018 could bring around 97220 new diagnoses of colon cancer and 43030 new cases of rectal cancer to the united states this type of cancer is more likely to appear in older individuals but there are many other risk factors associated with its emergence such as genetic and lifestyle factors of the latter one of the most cited risk factors is diet referring specifically to poor dietary habits that often also lead to obesity below we look at which foods and nutrients have been said to raise the risk of colorectal cancer and which types of diet have been deemed helpful in its prevention we also cover the diets most likely to keep the body resilient during and after treatment for this type of cancer prevention what to avoid numerous studies have indicated that a diet too rich in red meat is associated with a heightened risk of colorectal cancer `` red meat '' is defined by the world health organization who as `` all mammalian muscle meat including beef veal pork lamb mutton horse and goat '' eating a lot of red meat is known to significantly increase the risk of colorectal cancer a review of the evidence supporting this link notes that `` consumption of red meat might be related directly to the incidence of colorectal cancer or indirectly because a diet high in meat tends to be low in vegetables fruit and fiber '' a study of north italian populations showed that individuals who eat red meat alongside eggs cheese and other fatty foods as well as refined starches on a frequent basis had an almost twice higher risk of developing rectal or colon cancer than their peers who favored a plantbased diet more recent research also revealed that `` a daily increase of 100 grams of all meat or red meat is associated with a significant 12–17 percent increased risk of colorectal cancer '' in 2015 a report published by the international agency for research on cancer made the news by pointing out that every 50gram portion of processed meat such as bacon or salami eaten every day increases a persons risk of developing colorectal cancer by 18 percent this evidence led the who to classify processed meats as `` carcinogenic to humans '' the damage caused by unwholesome diets made the headlines again in early 2018 when a study published in the bmj reported that `` ultraprocessed foods '' might increase the risk of developing various types of cancer prevention what to eat so if a high intake of red meat and processed foods contributes to the risk of colorectal cancer what should be eaten to protect our bodies from this outcome in order to reduce the risk of colorectal cancer eat a healthful diet that favors fruit and veg according to the acs a diet high in fruits vegetables and fibers could help to minimize the risk and many existing studies seem to support this advice a study from the loma linda university in california found that vegetarianstyle diets are linked to a decreased risk of colorectal cancer the researchers studied four types of plantbased diet these were vegan or strictly no products of animal origin lactoovo vegetarian which includes dairy and eggs but no meat pescovegetarian which includes fish but no meat semivegetarian which includes meat and fish infrequently all four of these plantbased diets were deemed to be less likely to lead to cancer than nonvegetarian diets one study from last year also suggests that the more colorful your meal the better and that individuals should focus on integrating a rainbow of fruit and vegetables into their diets more specifically their experiments on the pig model which provides the closest resemblance to the human body in terms of metabolic processes indicated that purple potatoes might protect against colon cancer that may be because these root vegetables contain compounds that reduce levels of certain proinflammatory proteins in the body and inflammation is known to contribute to colon cancer risk the state of cancer are we close to a cure are we getting closer to finding a cure for cancer read now recently researchers have also isolated a number of elements typical of mediterraneanstyle diets that could help to prevent the onset of colorectal cancer people with a low risk of developing this condition ate plenty of fruits vegetables nuts and whole grains as well as fish and poultry rather than red meat and they drank little alcohol and soft drinks what to eat during and after treatment according to guidelines from the danafarber cancer institute in boston ma people undergoing treatment for colorectal cancer should also favor the `` rainbow plate '' meals and eat a varied array of fruits and vegetables to support their immune system a diet rich in tree nuts could improve the outcomes of cancer treatment eating small but frequent portions is another approach that specialists at the danafarber institute suggest that people following treatment may find useful they advise patients to stay hydrated and avoid alcohol and caffeine explaining that some types of medication may clash with these beverages but a previous study conducted by researchers at the institute which we covered on medical news today indicated that those undergoing treatment for colorectal cancer had an almost halved risk of cancer recurrence if they drank four cups of coffee or 460 milligrams of caffeine per day as lead study author charles fuchs explains `` we found that coffee drinkers had a lower risk of the cancer coming back and a significantly greater survival and chance of a cure '' research published last year in jama oncology suggests that a diet high in sources of fiber may improve survival rates for patients with stage one colorectal cancer eating whole grains was also linked to a better treatment outcome the researchers noted another study from last year notes that eating a minimum of 2 ounces approximately 57 grams of tree nuts such as cashews hazelnuts walnuts and pistachios almost halved the risk of colon cancer recurrence for individuals following stage three cancer treatment tree nut consumption also reduced the risk of death following treatment by 53 percent as for the risk of developing a second cancer following treatment the acs say that it can be reduced by making the same healthful diet choices advised for the prevention of a first cancer these include maintaining a healthy weight placing `` an emphasis on plant foods '' in daily meals and avoiding alcohol intake in fact dr victor moreno from the university of barcelona in spain and colleagues found that lifestyle factors are more important than genetic risk factors when it comes to the development of colorectal cancer '' this is important considering that lifestyle unlike genetic traits is somewhat modifiable '' first study author dr gemma ibáñez this suggests that a `` revamp '' of personal health choices may go a long way toward supporting positive outcomesresearchers in germany have found further evidence to support the idea that parkinsons could be an autoimmune disease immune cells act differently depending on whether or not a person has parkinsons using a stem cell model they showed how immune cells attacked dopamineproducing cells derived from people with parkinsons disease but not from people without it dopamine is a chemical messenger that supports many important brain functions these include functions that deal with reward emotions pleasure and movement control in parkinsons disease the midbrain neurons or brain cells that make dopamine die off but it is not clear what causes their death as more and more dopamine cells die levels of the chemical messenger drop giving rise to symptoms such as tremor slowness rigidity and problems with balance problems with speech and swallowing also develop as do several nonmovement symptoms estimates suggest that around half a million people in the united states have parkinsons disease autoimmunity and parkinsons autoimmune diseases arise because the immune system attacks healthy organs tissues and cells instead of protecting them there are at least 80 different known types of autoimmune disease including rheumatoid arthritis multiple sclerosis lupus and type 1 diabetes although the idea that parkinsons could be an autoimmune disease is not new the biological evidence to back it up is only just emerging in 2017 for instance a study from the us revealed how pieces of a protein that builds up in the dopamine cells of people with parkinsons can trigger a deadly immune attack against the cells parkinsons sniff test could predict risk up to a decade earlier adults who scored low on a sniff test were found to be almost five times more likely to develop parkinsons disease during a 10year followup read now more recently scientists have linked the use of drugs that subdue the immune system to a lower risk of developing parkinsons disease in the new study researchers from friedrichalexanderuniversität fau in erlangennürnberg germany have shown that t helper 17 th17 cells a type of immune t cell attack dopamine cells derived from people with parkinsons disease but not those derived from people without it they report their findings in the journal cell stem cell '' thanks to our investigations '' says senior study author beate winner a professor in the department of stem cell biology at fau `` we were able to clearly prove not only that t cells are involved in causing parkinsons disease but also what role they actually play '' stem cell model of parkinsons disease together with a team from the movement disorders clinic at university hospital erlangen the fau researchers had earlier discovered that the brains of those with parkinsons had higher levels of th17 cells th17 cells are also found in higher amounts in people with rheumatoid arthritis and other autoimmune diseases the discovery spurred the team to investigate further using a stem cell model of parkinsons disease to develop the model they took skin cells from people with and without parkinsons and induced them to become `` pluripotent stem cells '' pluripotent stem cells have the ability to mature into virtually any type of cell including neurons they coaxed the stem cells to mature into midbrain neurons that make dopamine this meant that they had batches of newly created dopamine cells that were specific to each of the patients the team then exposed each batch of dopamine cells to fresh th17 cells taken from the patients in this way each batch of patientspecific dopamine cells was exposed only to th17 cells that came from that same patient the results showed that while the th17 cells killed many of the dopamine cells from patients with parkinsons this did not happen with the cells that came from patients without the disease in further experiments the scientists also discovered that an antibody that was already in use in the hospital for the treatment of psoriasis was `` able to largely prevent the death '' of the brain cells '' the findings from our study offer a significant basis for new methods of treating parkinsons disease '' prof beate winnera largescale twopart study now published in the lancet public health journal examines the effects of high moderate and low carbohydrate intake on mortality risk the results of a new study could make you think twice before turning down carbs as more and more people are concerned with losing weight the prevalence of the lowcarb diet is increasing however new research points out that both too much carbohydrate and too little in our diet may be a cause for concern also according to the new research if you must choose between two types of lowcarb diet you should choose the one that replaces carbs with plantderived proteins and fats such diets may help prolong life unlike the diets that replace carbs with animal proteins and fat dr sara seidelmann who is a clinical and research fellow in cardiovascular medicine at brigham and womens hospital in boston ma led the research according to her `` lowcarb diets that replace carbohydrates with protein or fat are gaining widespread popularity as a health and weight loss strategy '' however our data suggest that animalbased lowcarbohydrate diets which are prevalent in north america and europe might be associated with shorter overall lifespan and should be discouraged '' '' instead if one chooses to follow a lowcarbohydrate diet then exchanging carbohydrates for more plantbased fats and proteins might actually promote healthy aging in the longterm '' dr sara seidelmann studying carbohydrate intake and mortality dr seidelmann and colleagues explain the motivation for their research previous studies they say have suggested that lowcarb diets are good for weight loss and metabolic health however these findings referred only to the short term the longterm effect of a low consumption of carbs on mortality risk has not garnered enough attention in the research community and the studies that have examined the matter yielded conflicting results also studies have not yet looked at the fat and protein sources in these lowcarb diets and their impact on mortality risk fats or carbs what causes obesity a new study settles the debate read now to remedy this the researchers studied over 15400 people aged 45–64 who registered in the atherosclerosis risk in communities study in 1987–1989 the male study participants reported an intake of 600–4200 kilocalories per day on average while the females said that they consumed 500–3600 kilocaleries per day the participants answered questions about their dietary habits both at the beginning of the study and 6 years later at followup the questionnaire asked about what types of food and drink the participants consumed in what portions and with what frequency then the scientists analyzed the link between overall carbohydrate consumption and mortality from any cause in the second stage of the study the team conducted a metaanalysis of cohort studies that summed up over 430000 people from across the world moderatecarb plantbased diet may be ideal the first part of the study revealed that both a low intake of carbs less than 40 percent of the total energy intake coming from carbs and a high intake or over 70 percent correlated with a higher risk of premature mortality by comparison a moderate carb intake of 50–55 percent of the total energy was found to correlate with 4 more years of life expectancy compared with people who consumed too little carbohydrate the second part of the study reinforced these findings and found that replacing carbs with animal proteins in a lowcarb diet correlated with a higher risk of mortality than consuming carbs in moderation '' too much and too little carbohydrate can be harmful but what counts most is the type of fat protein and carbohydrate '' says study coauthor walter willett a professor of epidemiology and nutrition at the harvard t h chan school of public health in boston ma senior study author dr scott solomon a professor of medicine at harvard medical school weighs in on the findings '' this work '' he says `` provides the most comprehensive study of carbohydrate intake that has been done to date and helps us better understand the relationship between the specific components of diet and longterm health '' '' while a randomized trial has not been performed to compare the longerterm effects of different types of lowcarbohydrate diets these data suggest that shifting towards a more plantbased consumption is likely to help attenuate major morbid disease '' dr scott solomonnew research has found that fasting triggers a molecule that can delay the aging of our arteries the findings could help prevent agerelated chronic diseases such as cancer cardiovascular disease and alzheimers scientists have discovered a new role for a molecule produced during fasting it can keep our vascular system supple and young the search for eternal youth has preoccupied the human imagination since the times of ancient greece in fact a quick look at greek mythology shows that youth was more prized than immortality as some myths tell the story of how futile the latter is if its not accompanied by the former in this regard modern medicine has recently been catching up with ancient mythology emerging scientific breakthroughs encourage us to hope that the myth of eternal youth will soon become a reality in a recent study researchers were able to reverse signs of aging such as hair loss and wrinkles in mice and perhaps more impressively another team of researchers managed to rejuvenate aging human cells now a new study adds to the evidence that aging can indeed be reversed scientists led by dr minghui zou the director of the center for molecular and translational medicine at georgia state university in atlanta showed that fasting or restricting calorie intake can produce a molecule that delays vascular aging the findings were published in the journal molecular cell how a ketone molecule keeps cells young dr zou explains the motivation for this study saying `` the most important part of aging is vascular aging when people become older the vessels that supply different organs are the most sensitive and more subject to aging damage so studying vascular aging is very important '' so the scientists set out to focus on vascular aging on the changes that occur with senescence and on ways to prevent them could this hormone rejuvenate memory a hormone produced in our bones may prevent agerelated cognitive decline read now specifically the researchers looked at the link between calorie restriction and vascular aging dr zou used mouse models of atherosclerosis studied their aortas postmortem and performed a series of cell culture experiments they also induced starvation in the rodents and conducted similar tests they saw that as expected the starving mice produced the molecule betahydroxybutyrate surprisingly however this molecule also prevented vascular aging betahydroxybutyrate is a ketone that is a molecule produced by the liver and used as an energy source when glucose is not available the body produces ketones during fasting or starvation on lowcarb diets and after prolonged exercise interestingly the research also revealed that betahydroxybutyrate promotes the division and multiplication of the cells that line the inside of blood vessels cellular division is a marker of cellular youth '' we found that betahydroxybutyrate can delay vascular aging thats actually providing a chemical link between calorie restriction and fasting and the antiaging effect '' dr minghui zou '' this compound can delay vascular aging through endothelial cells '' dr zou explains `` which line the interior surface of blood vessels and lymphatic vessels it can prevent one type of cell aging called senescence or cellular aging '' a drug target to stop aging chronic disease the study also revealed that the compound triggers another chain reaction that keeps the dna of these endothelial cells young and undamaged more specifically when betahydroxybutyrate attaches to the rnabinding protein heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein a1 it boosts the activity of a stem cell transcriptional factor called octamerbinding transcriptional factor oct4 in turn oct4 `` increases lamin b1 a key factor against dna damageinduced senescence '' which keeps the blood vessels young '' this stem cell factor oct4 '' says dr zou `` could be a pharmaceutical or pharmacological target for slowing down or preventing aging '' '' then if the vascular system becomes younger it is less likely to have cardiovascular disease alzheimers disease and cancer because all of these diseases are agerelated '' dr minghui zou '' we think this is a very important discovery and we are working on finding a new chemical that can mimic the effect of this ketone bodys function '' dr zou adds '' its difficult to convince people not to eat for the next 24 hours to increase the concentration of this compound and not everybody can do that but if we can find something that can mimic this effect and people can still eat it would make life more enjoyable and help fight disease ''hot tea is a staple beverage in winter time it can help to keep us warm and soothe sore throats it can give us that energy boost in the morning or help to relax us in the afternoon however a new study suggests that drinking hot tea may have serious negative consequences for some of us many of us enjoy a hot cup of tea but could we be putting ourselves at risk without knowing it across the world hot tea is a muchloved drink euromonitor international estimate that around 29 million tons of tea were consumed in 2016 alone this comes as no surprise seeing that teas are tasty and can bring many health benefits often brought about by the antioxidant effects of compounds such as polyphenols however a recent study from peking university in beijing china has found that the temperature at which tea is consumed could affect health particularly in certain groups already at risk of negative health outcomes lead study author jun lv a doctoral student from peking universitys department of epidemiology and biostatistics found that the consumption of hot tea correlates with the onset of esophageal cancer according to the world cancer research fund international esophageal cancer is the eighth most common type of cancer worldwide in the united states there were an estimated 16940 new cases of esophageal cancer in 2017 while in 2014 approximately 45547 people had this type of cancer according to lv drinking hot tea on a regular basis is linked to esophageal cancer in people who also smoke and drink alcohol habitually thus pointing to a complex favorable conjuncture for the development of this disease lv and colleagues conducted their research as part of the national natural science foundation of china and the national key research and development program the studys findings were published in the journal annals of internal medicine a fivefold increase in risk of cancer lv and team studied the link between drinking tea at very high temperatures and the development of esophageal cancer in the chinese population china is not only the number one consumer of tea but it is also a country with one of the highest incidences of this type of cancer according to the researchers chinese men in particular are most likely to be keen on not only hot tea but on cigarettes and alcohol as well the combination of tobacco alcohol compounds found in tea and the negative effects of drinks served at very high temperatures is likely to attack health eventually lv and colleagues suggest one injection could kill cancer are we drawing nearer to a cure for cancer read now the researchers monitored the health of participants in the china kadoorie biobank study whose aim is to collect data on the development of chronic diseases including heart diseases cancer and diabetes in china to ensure the consistency of their results the scientists excluded participants who had an existing diagnosis of cancer as well as those who had cut down on tea alcohol and cigarettes in the end they analyzed the data sourced from 456155 adult participants aged between 30 and 79 all these participants health developments were then followedup for a median period of 92 years during this period 1731 participants were diagnosed with esophageal cancer lv and team uncovered a positive correlation between drinking burninghot tea regular alcohol intake and smoking and a higher risk of esophageal cancer those who engaged in all three of these habits showed a fivefold increase in the risk for this type of cancer compared with their peers who did not drink tea at high temperatures drink alcohol or smoke cigarettes individuals who only drank hot tea and who did not drink alcohol or smoke did not have a higher risk of esophageal cancer either suggesting that the concerted effect of those three behaviors was a major risk factor based on the findings lv and colleagues advise people to choose their habits carefully and if they find it challenging to give up their daily drink or cigarette the researchers suggest that its best to avoid drinking tea at very high temperatures they conclude '' our findings suggest that abstaining from hot tea might be beneficial for preventing esophageal cancer in persons who drink alcohol excessively or smoke ''intermittent fasting such as eating only on alternate days might enhance the ability of aerobic exercise to increase endurance because the body switches to using fats and ketones as a source of fuel for muscles instead of carbohydrates research shows the effects of intermittent fasting on endurance this was the conclusion that researchers came to after studying the effect in mice with such a regimen for a limited period of time their study is to be published in the faseb journal the findings suggest that three meals per day and snacking may not be the only eating habit for people who engage in endurance sports to reach peak performance and maintain good health '' emerging evidence '' explains senior study author dr mark mattson from the laboratory of neurosciences in the national institute on aging in baltimore md `` suggests that intermittent dietary energy restriction might improve overall health and reduce risk factors for diabetes and cardiovascular disease in humans '' he and his team say that their findings propose that a similar pattern of eating and fasting may boost the beneficial effect of moderate aerobic exercise on endurance and that it should be studied further food deprivation exercise and endurance for the study the team put mice into four groups and observed them for 2 months as they went through the following exercise and eating patterns the control ctrl mice did not exercise at all and could eat as much food as they wanted every day like the ctrl mice the exercise ex mice could eat as much daily food as they wanted but they also ran on a treadmill for 45 minutes each day the `` alternate day food deprivation '' adf mice were only fed a fixed amount on every other day and did not exercise at all the exadf mice were restricted to the adf eating pattern but also exercised every day on a treadmill for 45 minutes how intermittent fasting can increase weight loss learn how researchers explored the chemical pathways that might be involved in intermittent fasting without restricting overall calorie intake read now as expected the results showed that the mice that exercised daily the ex and exadf groups performed better in endurance tests than the two groups that did not exercise at all ctrl and adf however the adf mice that exercised daily the exadf group had better endurance that is they could run farther and last longer than the daily exercise mice that were allowed to eat what they wanted the ex group the researchers also found that the mice on adf were able to maintain their body weight and had better glucose tolerance `` regardless of whether they exercised or not '' they note that following glucose metabolism although the ex groups glucose levels recovered at a faster rate than the ctrl groups the glucose levels of the adf and exadf groups recovered even faster shifted fuel preference the results showed that the effect of adf was to `` shift fuel preference '' in muscles toward fatty acids and away from carbohydrates and it also `` enhanced endurance '' in the adf mice that exercised exadf the researchers also found that the enhanced endurance performance did not come from changes to volume of oxygen usage or vo2max a way of measuring the amount of energy used during exercise as the rise in this measure was the same in both exercise groups ex and exadf instead the increased endurance in the exercising adf mice exadf group compared with the unrestricted eating exercising mice ex group came from a reduction in their respiratory exchange ratio or the ratio of co2 produced to o2 consumed this note the authors suggests that adf caused the fuel source to switch from carbohydrates to fats the scientists also observed that adf affects the liver differently to exercise for example adf alters gene expression that regulates `` lipid metabolism and cell growth '' whereas exercise changes gene expression that alters `` calcium signaling and stress adaptation '' the findings support the idea that evolutionary pressure has caused the body to optimize and perform extremely well when food is scarce dr thoru pederson editorinchief of the faseb journal comments on this '' this study reminds us of the nexus between our own huntergatherer metabolism still operative and modern habits with the findings from this animal system likely transferable to us to a considerable degree '' dr thoru pedersonsome cancers put up a fight against regular treatments such as chemotherapy or radiotherapy due to their various `` strategies '' for survival but by manipulating cellular processes scientists have now found a way of bypassing one of cancers selfpreservation mechanisms recent research reveals how we may be able to bypass one of cancers survival strategies and trigger tumor cell death autophagy a term meaning `` selfdevouring '' in greek is normally cells way of staying orderly and functional this is due to the fact that when autophagy is triggered cells break down the elements that arent useful any longer and `` recycle '' material for reuse this process has been shown to have complex implications for cancer cells sometimes it helps to destroy them but at other times it helps them to thrive one way in which cancer cells use autophagy `` in their own interest '' is to evade apoptosis or cell death apoptosis and autophagy both rely on similar mechanisms to break down cellular material that is no longer helpful but while apoptosis takes this disassembly all the way eventually causing the cell to die in autophagy death is postponed by recycling some of the cellular material in many cases researchers have discovered that chemotherapy and radiotherapy can increase the presence of autophagy in cancer cells which actually allows them to enter a `` hiatus '' mode that helps them to evade cell death and resume their activity later while researchers have studied the importance of autophagy inhibitors in promoting apoptosis the underlying mechanisms that allow cell death to occur when this recycling process is inhibited have remained unclear now researchers from the university of colorado cancer center in aurora have begun to uncover some of these mechanisms which has also allowed them to develop a fresh strategy to bypass tumor cells autophagy and trigger their death more efficiently the results of the study which was led by andrew thorburn have now been published in the journal developmental cell autophagy as suspended animation in the new study the researchers explain that the sofar mysterious link between autophagy and apoptosis is transcription factor foxo3a which is a protein that carries with it `` instructions '' as to what should take place at cellular level '' the problem '' says thorburn `` is this many anticancer treatments push cancer cells to the brink of death but the cells use autophagy to go into a kind of suspended animation pausing but not dying '' '' we dont want cancer cells to pause we want them to die we show that foxo3a may make the difference between these two outcomes '' andrew thorburn it turns out that foxo3a plays a key role in the cellular homeostasis related to autophagy that is it helps to regulate that process interestingly though autophagy also helps to regulate the levels of this transcription factor in other words when the presence of autophagy is increased foxo3a levels go down and when autophagy is downregulated more foxo3a is produced thereby boosting the cellular recycling process this means that autophagy remains at constant levels sometimes despite the action of chemotherapy drugs the state of cancer are we close to a cure where is cancer research in its quest for a cure read now previous research carried out at thorburns laboratory revealed that another protein known as puma is key in `` telling '' cells when to selfdestruct now thorburn and team have also found that foxo3a can increase the expression of the gene that drives the production of puma long story short when autophagy is inhibited more foxo3a is produced and when that happens the heightened levels of foxo3a help boost the presence of autophagy in cancer cells again but at the same time the transcription factor increases the presence of puma which drives cell death mechanism suggests combination therapy following these discoveries the scientists were interested in seeing whether they could use these mechanisms to render cancer cells more vulnerable to apoptosis their strategy involved using autophagy inhibitors alongside a tumor suppressing drug called nutlin while the drug is known to stunt the growth of cancer cells it had not been tied to triggering cell death so the researchers wanted to learn whether by pairing it up with autophagy inhibitors apoptosis would be prompted more efficiently the reason why thorburn and colleagues decided to test both therapies in concert is because both autophagy inhibition and nutlin are known to increase the production of puma though they do so through independent channels foxo3a and a transcription factor known as p53 respectively '' what we wanted to see '' says first author brent fitzwalter `` is whether these two things together nutlin along with autophagy inhibition would increase puma past the point of growth inhibition and into actual cell death '' after analyzing a series of tests conducted on cell cultures and mouse models of cancer tumors the researchers were delighted to see that this strategy did work the way they hoped it would '' the result was that we turned a drug that could slow down tumor growth but couldnt kill cancer cells into one that now kills the cells '' andrew thorburn these findings the researchers add could provide the groundwork for future clinical trials putting this combination treatment to the test to confirm its effectcoffee is a complex substance and as a new study finds its metabolic interactions are equally complex surprisingly coffee influences the same regions of the brain as cannabis a new study finds an intriguing relationship between cannabis and coffee although studies looking at coffees health benefits or lack thereof appear to be published on an almost daily basis its true impact on health is still poorly understood some studies have found health benefits some have concluded that it might reduce mortality risk and others drew no solid conclusions this confusion is due to several factors and one is the difficulty in separating cause and effect in large populationbased studies for example someone who drinks a lot of coffee might also sleep less smoke more tobacco drink less water or work unsociable hours these factors muddy the statistical waters also coffee is an incredibly complex beast it contains more than 1000 aroma compounds levels of which vary depending on the type of coffee bean and how it is brewed the metabolites of coffee recently a group of researchers from northwestern university in chicago il took a detailed look at the impact of coffee consumption on our internal chemistry their findings were published this week in the journal of internal medicine the 3month study involved 47 people living in finland in the first month the participants drank no coffee at all in the second they consumed four cups every day and in the third they drank eight cups each day cannabis intoxication may be stopped with antiobesity drug researchers may have found an antidote to cannabinoid intoxication read now using advanced profiling techniques lead author marilyn cornelis and her team checked the levels of more than 800 metabolites in the blood after each stage metabolites are chemicals produced during metabolism they are generally small molecules and carry out a range of functions both within and between cells the scientists found that with increased coffee consumption blood metabolites involved in the endocannabinoid system dropped off this is the system that gives cannabis its recreational and medical effects interestingly the effect of coffee consumption on the endocannabinoid system was the opposite to cannabis use endocannabinoid neurotransmitters decreased with the consumption of eight cups per day but levels are increased by cannabis use endocannabinoids may answer queries the endocannabinoid system helps to modulate a whole host of metabolic activities including blood pressure cognition addiction immunity appetite sleep and glucose metabolism so if coffee influences this overarching system it will open up many new research avenues '' these are entirely new pathways by which coffee might affect health '' notes cornelis `` now we want to delve deeper and study how these changes affect the body '' for instance the endocannabinoid system is believed to influence eating behavior as cornelis says this could help to explain `` the link between cannabis use and the munchies '' conversely coffee has been considered a potential weight loss aid and may reduce type 2 diabetes risk '' this is often thought to be due to caffeines ability to boost fat metabolism or the glucoseregulating effects of polyphenols plantderived chemicals '' marilyn cornelis '' our new findings linking coffee to endocannabinoids '' she adds `` offer alternative explanations worthy of further study '' drinking more coffee was also found to increase metabolites from the androsteroid system this infers that coffee speeds up the excretion of steroids and because steroids are involved in a number of conditions notably cancers coffee could potentially play a part here too this study was the first to have demonstrated such a depth of metabolic interaction between coffee and the endocannabinoid system no doubt these new learnings will form the foundations of future research into a range of conditions however more work will be needed to understand whether the observed changes in metabolites were due to caffeine or one of the myriad other compounds in those cups of delicious black goldone of the hallmarks of advanced prostate cancer is a faulty pten tumor suppressor gene now after screening compounds for their effect on cells lacking pten scientists have discovered that a natural insecticide called deguelin can kill such cells by disrupting their energy supply researchers reveal how a natural insecticide can destroy advanced prostate cancer cells deguelin belongs to a class of drugs known as mitochondrial inhibitors the drugs block the action of mitochondria mitochondria are the tiny compartments inside cells that convert glucose in the cell into molecules of adenosine triphosphate atp which serve as units of energy for fueling the various workings of the cell scientists at cold spring harbor laboratory in new york found that treating cells lacking pten with some types of mitochondrial inhibitor caused the cells to use glucose from their environment to make atp and then transport it into their mitochondria to preserve them it is as though cells without pten explains study leader lloyd trotman a professor at cold spring harbor laboratory are driven to `` consume vast quantities of glucose '' to help their mitochondria survive they do this to the point where they run out of fuel and die the researchers describe their work which included the use of a genetic mouse model of metastatic prostate cancer that was developed by prof trotmans group in a paper now published in the journal cell reports they suggest that their findings show that at the right dose certain mitochondrial inhibitors such as deguelin and another that they identified called rotenone may be able to kill prostate cancer cells without harming healthy cells however they also note that the timing and conditions have to be just right – for example the drug would not work if glucose levels are high '' the hope is '' prof trotman explains `` that carefully timed administration of these drugs can generate a much better window of selective killing '' prostate cancer and tumor suppressors after skin cancer prostate cancer is the most common cancer in men in the united states where in 2017 an estimated 161360 people discovered that they had the disease in the vast majority of cases prostate cancer is diagnosed before the disease has started to spread while the cancer is in this localized state it is much easier to treat and the 5year survival rate is close to 100 percent however once the cancer has become metastatic that is it has spread and set up new tumors in other parts of the body it is much harder to treat for men diagnosed with metastatic or advanced prostate cancer the average 5year survival rate is 29 percent in their study paper the authors note that a `` hallmark of advanced prostate cancer '' is that two tumor suppressor genes pten and p53 do not work properly because they are mutated when tumor suppressor genes work properly they `` slow down cell division '' repair broken dna and trigger programmed cell death faulty tumor suppressor genes on the other hand fail to carry out these functions and give rise to faulty cells that can grow uncontrollably and cause cancer deguelin stopped cancer progression prof trotman and colleagues suggest that of the 3 million men in the us who have prostate cancer `` roughly 100000 carry cancers with comutation of pten and p53 '' this `` prompted '' them to look for drugs that might work specifically against prostate cancers that carry mutated pten and p53 however because `` several studies '' have shown that loss only of p53 does not give rise to prostate cancer they decided to focus on pten shapeshifting cancer cells promote metastasis learn how loss of certain proteins makes prostate cancer cells able to change shape migrate and invade other tissues read now the researchers began the study by running a series of experiments using cells with and without pten they found that deguelin had the capacity to kill both types of cell but the dose required to kill cells with pten the normal cell model was 500 times higher than the dose required to kill cells without pten the cancer cell model they also discovered that the drug had a much stronger effect on the cells without pten because their mitochondria were consuming atp `` instead of producing it '' '' thats the exact opposite '' prof trotman says `` of what mitochondria are supposed to be doing mitochondria are supposed to generate atp for the rest of the cell '' finally when they then tested deguelin in their mouse model of `` lethal '' metastatic prostate cancer the researchers found that it stopped the cancer progressing drug requires low glucose levels the researchers suggest that the `` vulnerability '' that their findings have identified in ptendeficient cells may pave the way for `` highly selective targeting of incurable '' prostate cancer using mitochondrial inhibitors metformin the widely prescribed diabetes drug is also a mitochondrial inhibitor and is already being tested in clinical trials as an anticancer treatment the authors note that in the case of prostate cancer treatment with metformin seems to reduce disease deaths but not incidence '' this suggests '' they add `` that metformin may preferentially target aggressive prostate cancer '' and there are currently trials trying to find this out they propose that their new findings `` contribute to these efforts '' however they note that their study also suggests that one of the conditions necessary for mitochondrial inhibitors to have `` maximal selective killing '' power is `` depletion of tumor cell glucose supplies '' this would indicate the need for a treatment scenario that is opposite to that of diabetes in which metformin is taken just after a meal when blood glucose levels are high the authors conclude '' our results instead suggest that greater selectivity might be achieved if drugs are given when blood glucose levels are low ''finding a link between osteoarthritis and the bacteria in our guts seems unlikely however new research concludes that they could in fact be bedfellows a new study probes gut bacteria and their role in osteoarthritis obesity comes with a raft of related health risks including diabetes and cardiovascular disease it is also intimately tied to osteoarthritis often referred to as the `` wear and tear '' arthritis osteoarthritis involves the slow degradation of cartilage or the padding between bones in a joint in the united states osteoarthritis affects an estimated 31 million people and is a leading cause of disability globally as it stands osteoarthritis can not be cured people who carry excess weight put extra strain on their joints this it was thought explained the increased risk of osteoarthritis that comes with obesity a new study published this week in the journal jci insight looked at a more intriguing mechanism that might link these two conditions gut bacteria we have billions of bacteria living in our intestines they are vital for good health and over recent years just how vital they are has become increasingly clear researchers from the university of rochester medical center in new york set out to explore what links there might be between diet obesity gut bacteria and osteoarthritis googleadslotinfopush { '' slotname '' mnt_dlb1 '' slotcontainer '' mnt_dlb1_container } fattening up mice to begin with the researchers fed mice a highfat diet over a 12week period they quickly became diabetic and obese doubling their percentage of body fat next the bacterial residents of the animals colons were assessed as expected their microbiomes were offkilter their bowels were overrun with proinflammatory bacteria and had a distinct lack of healthy probiotic bacteria such as bifidobacteria osteoarthritis could researchers have found the key to prevention a new study may have revealed a new prevention and treatment strategy for osteoarthritis read now at the same time the scientists observed bodywide inflammation in the obese mice including the knee joints to induce osteoarthritis the researchers tore the animals menisci or the cushion of cartilage between the shin and thigh bones this type of injury commonly causes osteoarthritis in the obese mice osteoarthritis developed much more quickly than in the control mice in fact within 12 weeks virtually all of the obese mices cartilage had gone '' cartilage '' says michael zuscik phd an associate professor of orthopaedics in the center for musculoskeletal research `` is both a cushion and lubricant supporting frictionfree joint movements '' when you lose that '' he says `` its bone on bone rock on rock its the end of the line and you have to replace the whole joint preventing that from happening is what we as osteoarthritis researchers strive to do to keep that cartilage '' googleadslotinfopush { '' slotname '' mnt_dlb2 '' slotcontainer '' mnt_dlb2_container } can cartilage degradation be slowed for the next phase of the study the scientists started the protocol again they fattened up mice with a 12week highfat diet but this time they included a prebiotic called oligofructose prebiotics not to be confused with probiotics can not be broken down by mouse or human guts however many beneficial bacteria such as bifidobacteria thrive in their presence this subtle but important change in diet promoted the growth of healthy bacteria and produced a marked reduction in proinflammatory bacteria importantly it also reduced inflammation in the joints and the knee cartilage of the obese mice was indistinguishable from that of the nonobese control mice the addition of a prebiotic to the diet also reduced diabetic symptoms but it made no difference to the amount of weight that the mice gained so even though the joints were subjected to the same amount of strain they were healthier this supports the theory that inflammation rather than mechanical strain is the key driver of osteoarthritis '' that reinforces the idea that osteoarthritis is another secondary complication of obesity just like diabetes heart disease and stroke which all have inflammation as part of their cause '' robert mooney phd a professor of pathology and laboratory medicine '' perhaps '' adds prof mooney `` they all share a similar root and the microbiome might be that common root '' googleadslotinfopush { '' slotname '' mnt_dlb3 '' slotcontainer '' mnt_dlb3_container } a note of caution it is vital to remind ourselves that though the findings are exciting there are significant differences between the mouse microbiome and our own the next step therefore will be to move this line of investigation into humans the leaders of this study plan to team up with the military and veteran microbiome consortium for research and education at the us department of veterans affairs in denver co they hope to compare the microbiomes of veterans with and without obesityrelated osteoarthritis they will supplement some of these participants with prebiotics to gauge how much benefit this intervention might have in humansnew research suggests that intermittent fasting may raise insulin levels damage pancreatic cells and increase the amount of abdominal fat intermittent fasting may be a popular diet but it may also harm our metabolic health suggests a new study the socalled intermittent fasting diet has been gaining more and more traction among people who want to lose weight quickly this popular diet consists of `` fast '' days where one drastically restricts their calorie intake to a quarter of the daily dose or less for instance and `` feast '' days where the person dieting can eat whatever they please sometimes referred to as a dieting `` fad '' intermittent fasting has become popular in recent years due to its suggested benefits of increasing lifespan and staving off cancer indeed some animal studies have indicated that intermittent fasting may lower the risk of cancer while observational studies have shown that people whose religion has them fasting regularly live longer than seniors who do not fast but could there also be downsides to intermittent fasting research presented at the european society of endocrinology annual meeting which took place in barcelona spain suggests that the dieting practice may have serious consequences for a persons metabolism specifically the new study led by ana cláudia munhoz bonassa a researcher at the university of são paulo in brazil suggests that intermittent fasting may impair the normal activity of the pancreas and the production of insulin which may in turn raise the risk of type 2 diabetes intermittent fasting may lead to diabetes the researchers were prompted in their endeavor by older studies suggesting that fasting for a short period of time increases oxidative stress and the production of free radicals oxidative stress and excessive levels of free radicals have been suggested to speed up the aging process and to damage our dna raising the risk of cancer cardiovascular disease and neurodegeneration to find out whether intermittent fasting does indeed generate free radicals bonassa and her colleagues placed healthy adult rats on the diet for a period of 3 months going vegan could prevent type 2 diabetes the plantbased diet may keep diabetes at bay suggests a new study read now during this time the researchers measured and monitored the rodents insulin levels and function their body weight and their free radical levels at the end of the dieting period the rats had lost weight as expected however the distribution of their body fat changed unexpectedly the amount of fat tissue in the rodents abdomen increased belly fat has been shown by recent studies to be deeply linked with type 2 diabetes with some research even suggesting a molecular mechanism through which the former may lead to the latter additionally bonassa and colleagues found damage in the insulinsecreting pancreatic cells as well as higher levels of free radicals and signs of insulin resistance the studys lead author comments on the findings saying `` we should consider that overweight or obese people who opt for intermittent fasting diets may already have insulin resistance '' '' so '' bonassa continues `` although this diet may lead to early rapid weight loss in the longterm there could be potentially serious damaging effects to their health such as the development of type 2 diabetes '' '' this is the first study to show that despite weight loss intermittent fasting diets may actually damage the pancreas and affect insulin function in normal healthy individuals which could lead to diabetes and serious health issues '' ana cláudia munhoz bonassa in future the scientists plan to study in more detail the damaging effects of intermittent fasting on the normal functioning of the pancreas and the insulin hormonewhile viruses are best known for causing disease and suffering scientists have recently designed a way to use them as a force for good in the fight against cancer viruses an example of which is shown here have a bad name but can they be used therapeuticallyimage credit graham beards viruses are small rapidly replicating infectious agents that can only survive within the cells of other organisms they can be found in every ecosystem on earth and can infect all lifeforms capable of causing thousands of conditions from the common cold to the crimeancongo hemorrhagic fever viruses are as successful as they are deadly using their spectacularly successful traits scientists from cardiff university in the united kingdom are currently investigating ways to turn viruses against cancer the researchers have successfully `` trained '' viruses to recognize ovarian cancer and kill it without harming any healthy tissue retraining viruses the new study builds on similar research from recent years colead author dr alan parker notes '' reprogrammed viruses are already being used in gene therapy procedures to treat a range of diseases demonstrating they can be trained from being lifethreatening into potentially lifesaving agents '' cancer virus fuels immune system to attack brain tumors this study uses viruses to target aggressive brain tumors by injecting them into the bloodstream read now but in the past it was not possible to make the viruses selective enough such a lack of selectivity meant that they would also invade healthy cells and cause them damage in their new paper which is now published in the journal clinical cancer research the researchers outline a new approach that avoids this problem as dr parker explains `` weve taken a common wellstudied virus and completely redesigned it so that it can no longer attach to noncancerous cells but instead seeks out a specific marker protein called alphavbeta6 αvβ6 integrin which is unique to certain cancer cells allowing it to invade them '' evil turned good once a virus has entered a cell it hijacks the cellular machinery to make thousands of copies of itself then the cell ruptures and the new viruses are free to infect neighboring cells in the retrained viruses the same occurs but only cancer cells are invaded and ruptured the viruss ability to replicate so quickly makes them a formidable pathogen but once they have been repurposed their rapid multiplication becomes a therapeutic benefit as an added bonus the virus triggers an immune response and helps the immune system to recognize target and destroy the cancerous cells '' in this case we introduced the reprogrammed virus to ovarian cancer which it successfully identified and destroyed this is an exciting advance offering real potential for patients with a variety of cancers '' dr alan parker in the future the researchers hope to tweak their viral weapon further they want to train the virus to recognize a protein component that is shared by ovarian breast pancreatic lung and oral cancers also farther down the line the scientists hope to make the virus even more powerful they believe that by tinkering with its dna they might be able to program it to produce and release antibodies or other anticancer compounds while it is housed within the cell these initial studies were carried out on a mouse model of ovarian cancer but within the next 5 years they hope that the reprogrammed viruses will reach the clinical trials stagetoo many carbohydrates or too much fat opinions as to which parts of our diets are likely to cause obesity are split a recent study takes a closer look at the effects of diet on weight and health does a diet that is too rich in fats or too rich in carbs lead to obesity earlier this year medical news today reported on a study that pitted the potential benefits of the lowcarb diet against those of the lowfat one the scientists asked which type of diet would be best for shedding excess weight their conclusion in essence that it is hard to tell both have pros and cons some people may benefit more from laying off the fats whereas others may see better results by sticking to a lowcarb dietary plan both carbs which are a primary source of glucose or simple sugar and fats have been blamed for increasing a persons likelihood of facing obesity and studies keep debating these points so the argument is far from settled recently the view that an excessive carb intake may be the main dietary cause of obesity has had more traction though some researchers have questioned this in a paper now published in the journal cell metabolism researchers from two institutions the institute of genetics and developmental biology at the chinese academy of sciences in beijing and the university of aberdeen in the united kingdom have once more turned the cards suggesting that we should look once more to fatty foods sugar intake had no impact on weight in what they think is the largest study of its kind to date lead researcher prof john speakman and team worked with mice to test the effects of three macronutrients – carbohydrates fats and protein on body fat accumulation the scientists turned to the murine model because as they explain asking human participants to follow one type of diet and evaluating them for very long periods of time is extremely tricky a savory starter could help you to make better food choices learn how umami or savory foods could lead you to making more healthful choices in your diet read now but looking at rodents which have similar metabolic mechanisms could offer crucial clues and workable evidence mice belonging to five different genetically engineered strains were assigned to one of 30 various types of diet including variations on their content of fat carbs and protein the mice were kept on their respective diets for a period of 3 months which counts as 9 years would for humans throughout this time they were assessed for changes in body weight and body fat content to see which of the mice would end up becoming overweight the scientists found that only an excessive intake of fats increased adiposity body fat content in mice while carbohydrates including up to 30 percent of calories derived from sucrose had no impact moreover a combined fatty and sugary diet did not increase body fat more than a fatty diet did on its own as for protein intake the research team says that there was no evidence that it affected the intake of other macronutrients or the amount of body fat and why does the intake of fat lead to obesity the researchers believe that fats `` appeal '' to the brains reward system stimulating a craving for an excessive amount of calories which then determines weight gain '' a clear limitation of this study '' as prof speakman explains `` is that it is based on mice rather than humans '' '' however mice have lots of similarities to humans in their physiology and metabolism and we are never going to do studies where the diets of humans are controlled in the same way for such long periods '' '' so the evidence it provides is a good clue to what the effects of different diets are likely to be in humans '' prof john speakmana study led by researchers in north carolina reveals that over the course of a 16week program lifestyle changes had the biggest impact on high blood pressure a new study demonstrates that lifestyle changes can be as effective as medication importantly those in the study had a reduced need for hypertension medication after the 16 weeks the study was presented at the american heart associations joint hypertension 2018 scientific sessions which outlines new hypertension research each year in all the study involved 129 men and women who were either overweight or obese they were all aged 40–80 and all participants had elevated blood pressures none of the participants were taking blood pressure medication at the time of the study but about half met the criteria for hypertension drugs diet exercise and hypertension each participant was randomly assigned one type of intervention one group changed its diet to the dash diet participated in counseling and underwent supervised exercise three times per week another group only changed its diet again the dash diet was used another group changed nothing the dash diet is an eating plan specifically designed to improve heart health it includes eating vegetables fruits whole grains lowfat or fatfree dairy products fish poultry beans and nuts adherents limit foods high in saturated fats such as fatty meats fullfat dairy and tropical oils including coconut palm kernel and palm new triple pill could eliminate high blood pressure a new combination drug looks set to revolutionize blood pressure treatment worldwide read now those in the first group had the most success overall in lowering their blood pressure they lost an average of 19 pounds over 16 weeks and reduced their blood pressure readings by an average of 16 millimeters of mercury mm hg systolic and 10 mm hg diastolic by contrast those eating a dash diet showed a blood pressure decrease of 11 mm hg systolic and 8 mm hg diastolic while those who did not modify their behavior averaged a blood pressure reading decline of 3 mm hg systolic and 4 mm hg diastolic at baseline 50 percent of the participants met the criteria to receive hypertensive medication however by the end of the study only 23 percent of those who changed their diet still met criteria as well as just 15 percent of those who changed both diet and exercise routine '' lifestyle modifications including healthier eating and regular exercise can greatly decrease the number of patients who need blood pressurelowering medicine '' states study author dr alan hinderliter an associate professor of medicine at university of north carolina in chapel hill the health impact of hypertension high blood pressure is common the american heart association aha estimate that hypertension affects almost half of adults living in the us and that many of those affected dont know that they have a blood pressure problem this is why high blood pressure is known as a `` silent killer '' there are very few if any symptoms hypertension if left untreated and unchecked can lead to serious health problems untreated high blood pressure can contribute to heart attacks strokes heart failure kidney disease vision loss sexual dysfunction angina and peripheral artery disease it can also damage your blood vessels and prompt lowdensity lipoprotein the `` bad '' cholesterol to build up in fissures along artery walls making the circulatory system work harder while being less efficient while this study showed that lifestyle modifications including diet and exercise might be able help decrease the need for blood pressure medications hinderliter notes that there should be further research before recommendations can be made also individuals with elevated blood pressure should always follow doctors orders and if already taking those medications continue for as long as its recommended still altering diet and adding exercise to a weekly routine is one measure the aha recommend for those who experience hypertension it can have a considerable impact on overall healthresearchers have found a way to deplete breast cancer cells of energy and thus halt their growth the findings may one day help to alleviate treatmentresistant breast cancer cancer cells shown here need to produce energy in their nucleus in order to spread but new research found a way to prevent them from doing so according to the american cancer society acs around 2 in 3 cancers are hormonedriven this means that the breast cancer cells possess proteins that act as hormone receptors and feed off of estrogen or progesterone these hormones help the breast cancer to spread so hormone therapy aims to prevent cancer from spreading or recurring by blocking the hormone receptors however these hormoneblocking drugs often have a wide array of side effects or are not fully effective because the cancer finds new ways to spread or becomes resistant to treatment but now new research carried out by scientists from the karolinska institutet and science for life laboratory in solna sweden offers new hope as the team discovered a way to starve hormonefueled breast cancer cells of energy this may lead to better drugs in the future the researchers led by prof thomas helleday of the department of medical biochemistry and biophysics in the karolinska institutet found a protein that helps breast cancer cells to get the energy they need to proliferate they also found a compound that inhibits this protein brent dg page and nicholas ck valerie of the science for life laboratory at karolinska are the first authors of the new study which was published in the journal nature communications starving breast cancer cells of energy prof helleday and his colleagues originally set out to investigate the role of the socalled nudt5 protein a nucleotidemetabolizing enzyme in breast cancer they discovered that nudt5 is used by breast cancer cells to create energy in their nucleus the nuclear energy thus created is used to drive cancercausing gene expression so the researchers shifted their focus to developing a molecule that could block nudt5s activity this compound is called th5427 and laboratory experiments revealed that it successfully acts as an nudt5 inhibitor stopping the spread of breast cancer cells what to know about breast cancer and back pain what are the links between back pain and breast cancer read now the authors summarize their findings saying `` utilizing these stateoftheart techniques led us to discover th5427 a potent and cellactive nudt5 inhibitor that can be used to further understand the role of nudt5 in biological systems '' '' we have provided a proof of concept showing that th5427 blocks nudt5dependent processes in breast cancer cells and targeting nudt5 may represent a promising new therapeutic approach for breast cancer treatment '' explain the researchers beyond this `` proof of concept '' the scientists now hope to discover and develop more nudt5 inhibitors which in the long run could help to drastically improve the lives of breast cancer patients they say '' ongoing efforts are aimed at formulating nudt5 inhibitors for in vivo use and will focus on further investigating the role of nudt5 in cancer and other disease models '' ultimately prof helleday and his colleagues hope to be moving toward human clinical trials but the studys senior author emphasizes the long road ahead '' theyre exciting findings but the path ahead is long since we still know very little about how nudt5 operates '' he says the researchers hope that their findings will help to treat not only breast cancer but hopefully other forms of cancer as wellnot a lover of indian food a new study might change your mind researchers have found that a compound in turmeric the spice that gives curry its golden color could help to improve the mood and memory of older adults a twicedaily dose of curcumin found in turmeric has been found to improve memory and mood in older adults turmeric has been linked to a wealth of health benefits last year for example medical news today reported on a study suggesting that turmeric could help to treat pancreatic cancer while other research claims the popular spice may help to treat stroke and alzheimers disease it is turmerics abundance of a compound called curcumin that makes it so special studies have shown that curcumin is an antioxidant meaning that it can protect our cells against damage caused by free radicals it also has strong antiinflammatory properties the new study recently published in the american journal of geriatric psychiatry provides further evidence that curcumin can protect the brain first study author dr gary small of the longevity center at the university of california los angeles and colleagues tested the compound on 40 adults aged between 51 and 84 all of whom had mild memory problems for a total of 18 months the participants were randomized to one of two groups one group took 90 milligrams of curcumin twice daily while the other group took a placebo the curcumin used in this study was a bioavailable form called theracurmin which the researchers describe as a `` form of curcumin with increased intestinal endothelium penetrability '' curcumin may have cognitive benefits at study baseline all participants underwent standard cognitive tests and these were repeated every 6 months throughout the study as well as at the end of the study additionally 30 of the subjects 15 of whom who were receiving curcumin had positron emission tomography pet scans of their brain at the beginning and end of the study is turmeric good for your skin learn whether turmeric may benefit skin health read now these scans were conducted in order to assess levels of the betaamyloid and tau which are proteins that are considered a hallmark of alzheimers disease research has suggested that an increase in levels of betaamyloid and tau can occur up to 15 years before symptoms of alzheimers arise suggesting that the proteins may be an early indicator of the disease results revealed that the subjects who took curcumin twice daily demonstrated a 28 percent improvement in memory tests over the course of the study while those who took the placebo showed no significant memory improvements subjects who received curcumin also experienced slight improvements in mood unlike those who took the placebo what is more participants who took curcumin also had lower levels of betaamyloid and tau in the hypothalamus and amygdala brain regions which are regions that play key roles in memory and emotion '' these results suggest that taking this relatively safe form of curcumin could provide meaningful cognitive benefits over the years '' dr gary small first author the side effects of curcumin were mild the team reports four people experienced abdominal pain and other gastrointestinal symptoms but so did two of the placebotreated participants one subject who received curcumin experienced `` a temporary feeling of heat and pressure in the chest '' according to dr small and colleagues a followup study is in the pipeline it will involve a larger number of participants including people with mild depression and individuals with a genetic risk for alzheimers disease the aim of the research will be to determine whether certain factors such as age the severity of cognitive problems and the presence of alzheimersrelated genes might influence the effects of curcumin on mood and memoryrecent research published in the journal frontiers in physiology examines the effect of electronic cigarette vapors on two types of white blood cell the findings suggest that the compounds that give ecigarettes their flavor are toxic with some flavors being worse than others nicotinefree liquids in ecigarettes may be quite toxic according to new research despite the fact that electronic cigarettes ecigarettes help some people to quit smoking conventional ones the devices contain many other nonnicotine chemicals the health effects of which are still being investigated here at medical news today weve been trying to keep you updated on all the latest scientific discoveries when it comes to unraveling the complex effects of using ecigarettes or `` vaping '' for example a couple of studies that we reported on suggested that ecigarettes may have adverse cardiovascular effects and that they may slow down heart rate that said some of these studies are either observational and thus unable to explain causality or performed in mice new research however takes things to the laboratory scientists at the university of rochester medical center in new york set out to test the hypothesis that vaping ecigarettes that do not contain nicotine would be less harmful than conventional cigarettes to this end the researchers who were led by senior author dr irfan rahman focused on `` the immunotoxicological and the oxidative stress effects by these ecigarette flavoring chemicals on two types of human monocytic cell lines '' oxidative stress is a process in which oxygen radicals are produced in excess resulting in a series of damaging effects including increased toxicity damage to our dna or even cancer monocytes are a type of white blood cell that play a critical role in our immune response to inflammation therefore the results of the new study are key for our understanding of the relationship between ecigarettes and our immune system cinnamon vanilla buttery flavors the worst to assess the flavorings potential for causing oxidative stress the team measured the production of socalled reactive oxygen species ros '' we hypothesized '' the authors write `` that the flavoring chemicals used in ejuiceseliquids induce an inflammatory response cellular toxicity and ros production '' as expected the cytotoxicity tests performed by first author dr thivanka muthumalage and colleagues revealed that treatment with these chemicals increased inflammation and tissue damage all of this was done by increasing the levels of oxidative stress also `` mixing a variety of flavors resulted in greater cytotoxicity and cellfree ros levels compared to the treatments with individual flavors suggesting that mixing of multiple flavors of eliquids are more harmful to the users '' the researchers add the pros and cons of ecigarettes revealed a metareview of existing studies examines the evidence available for the benefits and harms of ecigarettes read now the authors conclude by saying `` our data suggest that the flavorings used in ejuices can trigger an inflammatory response in monocytes mediated by ros production providing insights into potential pulmonary toxicity and tissue damage in ecigarette users '' '' cinnamon vanilla and butter flavoring chemicals were the most toxic but our research showed that mixing flavors of eliquids caused by far the most toxicity to white blood cells '' dr thivanka muthumalage dr rahman comments on the significance of these findings saying `` currently nicotinefree ecigarettes are not regulated and alluring flavor names such as candy cake cinnamon roll and mystery mix attract young vapers '' '' our scientific findings show that eliquid flavors can and should be regulated and that ejuice bottles must have a descriptive listing of all ingredients we urge regulatory agencies to act to protect public health '' he addswe undertake creative pursuits such as writing acting drawing or dancing simply because we enjoy them intuitively we know that creativity is good for us and our creative passions make us happy but what does science have to say about the benefits of creativity creative activities make us feel happier and theyre a great outlet for emotions but what are their other health benefits some pursue creative activities as a hobby and some do it for a living but no matter what road weve taken to unleash our imaginations and need for free selfexpression its pretty clear that making things is part and parcel of being human we have been creating since prehistoric times more than 39900 years ago our ancestors left some of their first marks the outlines of their hands and crude drawings of animals on the walls of caves we could go as far as to say that our need to create things is in our blood this has served us well over the course of time as we have learned to create tools and shelters cook food make medicines for various ailments and set bones sometimes however we have created things just for the sake of it it could be said as oscar wilde infamously proclaimed in the picture of dorian gray that `` all art is quite useless '' but is it really i sometimes wish i could tap mr wilde on the shoulder and ask him `` well if art is so useless why did you write so assiduously '' aside from any philosophical arguments that may be brought to the contrary a lot of research in the medical field has actually suggested that art and more specifically being creative is in fact quite useful for our mental and physical wellbeing below we look at some of the benefits that creative endeavors from writing to dancing can bring us and we encourage you to incorporate even more creativity into your own life improved mental health drawing painting or molding objects from clay has been scientifically proven to help people to deal with different kinds of trauma in a comprehensive article on the connection between art healing and public health heather l stuckey and jeremy nobel say that `` art helps people express experiences that are too difficult to put into words such as a diagnosis of cancer '' '' artistic selfexpression '' they continue `` might contribute to maintenance or reconstruction of a positive identity '' five hobbies that can improve your health can you stay healthy by doing more of what you like we look at some of the hobbies whose health benefits are confirmed by science read now a number of studies have also found that writing expressive writing in particular which requires participants to narrate an event and explain how it affected them can help people to overcome trauma and manage negative emotions in much the same way as visual expression this type of writing allows people to take negative situations that can not be changed and integrate them into their lifes story creating meaning for events that left indelible marks such as a medical diagnosis a loved ones death or a violent experience one qualitative study that interviewed male survivors of childhood abuse found that asking them to write about their traumatic experiences allowed them in conjunction with specialized trauma therapy to make sense of the trauma in deeply personal ways immediate impact vs longterm benefits immediately after writing down ones experiences the writer might feel an increase in negative emotions as they recall bad incidents however the longterm effects are positive say karen a baikie and kay wilhelm the authors of a review of studies that focused on expressive writing '' the immediate impact of expressive writing is usually a shortterm increase in distress negative mood and physical symptoms and a decrease in positive mood compared with controls '' they write adding '' however at longerterm followup many studies have continued to find evidence of health benefits in terms of objectively assessed outcomes selfreported physical health outcomes and selfreported emotional health outcomes '' expressive writing doesnt just help with trauma and negative emotions a 2001 study found that asking people to write about positive experiences and about `` the best self '' that they wanted to develop in the future was also associated with an increased sense of psychological wellbeing similar effects were noted in a later study that asked participants to write about `` intensely positive experiences '' brainboosting effects speaking of writing research has also shown that writing down things down can help with learning and memorization however if you take the shortcut and type the ideas that you want to remember that wont actually do you much good if you want to learn more efficiently researchers say that you have to go oldfashioned and put pen to paper putting pen to paper can help us to learn faster but writing isnt the only path to a better brain albert einstein reportedly said that music was so much a part of his life that if he hadnt been a physicist he would certainly have evolved into a musician well it does appear that making music can have a significant impact on how well different areas of our brains communicate with each other a review published in 2014 suggests that individuals with musical training such as those who learned how to play an instrument have improved connectivity between the two hemispheres of their brains another creative pursuit that improves our cognition is playacting a study from 2004 found that older individuals who were encouraged to participate in theater performances had improved psychological wellbeing after 4 weeks they also exhibited better cognitive functioning in particular the participants experienced better word and listening recall as well as improved problemsolving abilities physical health benefits '' studies have shown that individuals who have written about their own traumatic experiences exhibit statistically significant improvements in various measures of physical health reductions in visits to physicians and better immune system functioning '' write stuckey and nobel a randomized trial that involved people undergoing hiv treatment showed that expressive writing helped participants to boost their immune system while it is unclear why people who wrote about their experiences on a regular basis exhibited an increased cd4+ lymphocyte count both writing and listening to music have been linked to an improved immune system response cd4+ lymphocytes are key to the functioning of the immune system and they are one of the main targets of the immunodeficiency virus writing was also seen to help with chronic pain management people dealing with conditions that made them experience chronic pain had improved pain control plus a decline in pain severity after expressing angry feelings in written form over a period of 9 weeks music therapy has immune systemboosting effects as well music affects our brains in complex ways stimulating the limbic system and moderating our response to stressful stimuli according to stuckey and nobel listening to music `` may help to restore effective functioning in the immune system partly via the actions of the amygdala and hypothalamus '' these brain regions are implicated in mood regulation and hormonal processes as well as in the bodys inflammatory response dance and the body creativity can also be a very mobile endeavor and this mobility brings its own set of benefits for instance a study focusing on breast cancer survivors found that dancing helped to improve shoulder function in participants and that it had a positive impact on their body image moreover dancing can be a fun way of staying or becoming fit in 2014 a woman who lost 100 pounds just by sticking to her dance routine became a media sensation recent research has shown that zumba programs can improve blood pressure and triglyceride levels while previous studies linked aerobic dance with better weight management a korean study from 2007 that looked at hiphop alongside aerobic dancing found that participants not only experienced improved psychological moods but that they also reported lower levels of fatigue '' invention it must be humbly admitted '' wrote mary shelley in her introduction to frankenstein `` does not exist in creating out of void but out of chaos '' from 1818 when shelleys novel was first published to the present day and well before that and well beyond now creativity has been the ultimate means of reigning chaos in and drawing benefit out of it so if we can bring some order to our mental or physical states just by journaling smudging paint or learning to play the guitar why not take advantage of that and welcome more art into our lives we picked linked items based on the quality of products and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you we partner with some of the companies that sell these products which means healthline uk and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a links abovelovers of red wine rejoice researchers have now identified yet another reason why you should keep on enjoying this beverage red wine stains the teeth making your smile look like something out of a bmovie but a new study says that it might protect your oral health some of us love to savor a glass of red wine or two with dinner every once in a while the catch is that this velvety drink often leaves the teeth stained so maybe its not such a good idea to order it on your first date or while out on a business dinner that being the case its certainly not intuitive to infer that red wine could do anything for your oral health the contrary rather still this is precisely what a study conducted by researchers from spain suggests the research was led by m victoria morenoarribas and colleagues from instituto de investigación en ciencias de la alimentación in madrid and the department of health and genomics at the center for advanced research in public health in valencia morenoarribas and team have now published their findings in the journal of agricultural and food chemistry what happens in the mouth in the new study the scientists first compared the effect of two types of polyphenol typically found in red wine caffeic acid and pcoumaric acid as well as that of red wine and grape seed extracts provinols and vitaflavan on three harmful oral bacteria fusobacterium nucleatum streptococcus mutans and porphyromonas gingivalis what they found experimenting with a laboratory model of gum tissue was that the two red wine polyphenols caffeic acid and pcoumaric acid were most effective at repelling the harmful oral bacteria and preventing them from attaching to healthy tissue next they tested a mix of caffeic acid pcoumaric acid and streptococcus dentisani which is an oral probiotic that as recent research has suggested may help to prevent tooth decay this experiment was even more successful as the protective effect of the two polyphenols was enhanced by the presence of the probiotic finally the analysis of phenolic metabolites which are substances formed as the polyphenols start transforming in the mouth suggested that these small products may in fact be the `` active ingredient '' associated with the polyphenols protective effect so go ahead pour yourself a glass of red wine tonight safe in the thought that this drink at least wont cause you any oral suffering of course dont overdo it red wine is an alcoholic beverage after all and too much alcohol isnt anyones friend using a small wine glass though could help you curb your appetite a little so you can delight your palate and teeth and gums with some polyphenols while still keeping your gray matter quite safedepression has become a common mental health problem for some this condition lingers for many years and scientists now strive to understand how that might affect the brain and how treatments should be adjusted to address these changes when depression doesnt loosen its grip for a decade how does it impact the brain according to data from the centers for disease control and prevention cdc across the united states 81 percent of people over the age of 20 have depression over any given 2week period for some people depression might only be episodic and overcome within a matter of weeks or months however for others diagnosed with major depression the condition could persist for years affecting their lifestyle and quality of life looking at cases in which major depression lasts for over a decade researchers from the centre for addiction and mental health camh in ontario canada wanted to investigate whether living with this condition for so long would significantly impact the brain and if so how dr jeff meyer from the camh led a study focusing on that question he and his team compared the brain scans of people who had lived with untreated depression for 10 years or longer with those of people with a shorter history of depression the findings published last week in the lancet psychiatry suggest that specialists might want to change their approach to treating longterm depression as it progresses to match its increasing neurological impact depression may be progressive dr meyer and team worked with 80 people aged 18–75 of these 25 had lived with depression for longer than 10 years 25 had had the condition for less than a decade and 30 were depressionfree this final cohort made up the control group in a study from 2015 dr meyer and his colleagues saw that during episodes of major depression peoples brains would exhibit markers of inflammation understanding anhedonia what happens in the brain anhedonia or loss of pleasure in usually enjoyable activities is often associated with depression what are the underlying mechanisms read now based on that knowledge in the new study he wanted to explore whether the brain inflammation worsened over time in people with longlasting depression the scientists determined the severity of the neuroinflammation using a type of brain scan known as positron emission tomography pet this allowed them to monitor the activity of microglia a type of cell found in the central nervous system which are associated with the inflammatory response to injury active microglia produce translocator protein tspo which is a key marker of inflammation through the pet scans dr meyer and team found that the concentration of tspo was 29–33 percent higher in the brains of people who had lived with depression for more than a decade these inflammation markers were seen in three brain regions in particular the prefrontal cortex the anterior cingulate cortex and the insula consistent with previous findings the brains of those who had lived with untreated depression for shorter periods of time still had higher concentrations of tspo than the brains of healthy controls more focused studies required according to the researchers these results suggest that longterm depression should be treated as a different stage of the same condition as it may require a different therapeutic approach than depression in its earlier phases this they add is similar to the strategy applied in the case of neurodegenerative diseases which are also characterized by heightened brain inflammation '' greater inflammation in the brain is a common response with degenerative brain diseases as they progress such as with alzheimers disease and parkinsons disease '' notes dr meyer if depression although not a neurodegenerative disease is similar to such conditions that is characterized by an increasingly serious inflammatory response in the brain then it may be adequate to treat it with antiinflammatory drugs dr meyer suggests therefore he argues that further studies should look into the possibility of repurposing such medication as therapy for depression another question that should be answered he concludes is what the best therapy for people with longterm major depression might be since this specific population does not usually benefit from dedicated studiesresearchers provide further evidence that vitamin d may protect against cancer after finding that people from japan had a lower risk of the disease when they had higher levels of the `` sunshine vitamin '' researchers suggest that a higher vitamin d level could protect against cancer the results of the study which is one of the first to investigate the link between vitamin d levels and cancer risk in an asian population were recently published in the bmj the research was conducted by taiki yamaji of the center for public health sciences of the national cancer center in japan and her colleagues vitamin d is an essential vitamin for our bodies it not only helps to maintain calcium levels for good bone health it also plays significant roles in immune system functioning neuronal communication and muscle functioning the national institutes of health nih say that adults should aim to get around 600 international units of vitamin d every day the bodys main source of vitamin d is sunlight which is why it is often referred to as the `` sunshine vitamin '' we can also get vitamin d from certain foods including salmon tuna and cheese as well as from dietary supplements which are available to purchase online previous research has suggested that low vitamin d levels are a risk factor for certain cancer types and that increasing levels of the vitamin could help to protect against the disease however yamaji and colleagues point out that most research on vitamin d and cancer risk to date has focused on white populations '' given that vitamin d concentrations and metabolism vary substantially by raceethnicity '' note the researchers `` whether similar associations would also be observed in noncaucasian populations remains to be clarified '' with this in mind the researchers sought to determine how vitamin d levels influence the risk of cancer in japanese adults overall cancer risk reduced by a fifth the researchers analyzed the data of 33736 japanese people who were a part of the japan public health centerbased prospective study they were between the ages of 40 and 69 and they were followedup for an average of 16 years blood samples were taken from each participant at study baseline these were assessed for levels of 25hydroxyvitamin d which is the circulating form of vitamin d could vitamin d lower cardiovascular death risk researchers suggest that vitamin d could reduce the risk of death from cardiovascular disease read now the participants were divided into four groups based on their vitamin d levels ranging from the lowest to highest information was also gathered on the subjects medical history as well as on their dietary and lifestyle factors over the 16year followup period a total of 3301 new cancer cases were identified among the study participants compared with subjects who had the lowest vitamin d levels those with a higher level had a 20 percent lower risk of cancer overall the team reports this finding persisted after accounting for myriad possible confounding factors including age body mass index bmi levels of physical activity smoking status and alcohol intake on looking at specific cancers the researchers found that a higher vitamin d level was associated with a 30–50 percent lower risk of liver cancer with this reduced risk being more prominent in men higher vitamin d levels were not linked to a lower risk of lung cancer or prostate cancer the team reports and no association was found between higher vitamin d levels and an increase in cancer risk a possible ceiling effect yamaji and colleagues caution that their findings are solely observational so no conclusions can be made about the link between vitamin d and cancer risk furthermore the study has some important limitations for example they point out that there were only a small number of organspecific cancers included in their analysis additionally they note that it is possible that some cancer risk factors that were not accounted for in this study might have influenced the findings still the researchers say that their findings `` support the hypothesis that vitamin d has protective effects against cancers at many sites '' that being said the results indicate that there is a `` ceiling effect '' for vitamin d and cancer risk in other words there is an optimal level of vitamin d that protects us against cancer but going beyond this level offers no further benefit '' future studies are needed '' the researchers conclude `` to clarify the doseresponse pattern and the optimal vitamin d concentrations for cancer prevention '' we picked linked items based on the quality of products and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you we partner with some of the companies that sell these products which means healthline uk and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a links abovevitamin d which is often called the `` sunshine vitamin '' boasts a range of physiological roles a new study reveals that following a heart attack it might protect against consequent heart failure how might the sunshine vitamin benefit our heart health few foods contain vitamin d instead the vast majority is synthesized in our skin following exposure to the sun during a study of rickets in children vitamin d was initially identified as an important player in bone health we now know that vitamin d has an array of duties in the body beyond that of bone health for instance vitamin d is thought to impact the workings of muscles and blood vessels and even more recently evidence has been gathering that the vitamin might have a protective effect on heart health specifically studies have linked low levels of vitamin d to coronary artery disease and heart failure vitamin d and heart failure heart failure is a serious potentially lifethreatening condition wherein the heart is unable to pump sufficient blood and oxygen to nourish the tissues of the body in 2009 around 1 in 9 deaths in the united states `` included heart failure as contributing cause '' and because heart failure is so common understanding exactly what is involved physiologically is important due to the recent evidence that vitamin d might protect against heart failure scientists are keen to get a clearer understanding of the relationship vitamin d may protect against cancer researchers provide new evidence that vitamin d may protect against cancer read now although the benefits of vitamin d for heart health are becoming wellestablished the mechanisms at work are not understood recently a team of researchers from westmead institute for medical research in australia decided to take a closer look '' the benefits of vitamin d are becoming increasingly known but we still dont fully understand how mechanistically it can help with heart disease management we wanted to know more about how vitamin d protects the heart after a heart attack '' lead researcher prof james chong to dig into this problem the scientists used a mouse model and a form of vitamin d called 125dihydroxyvitamin d3 125d which `` interacts with hormones '' they wanted to understand how 125d affected an important set of heart cells the cells of interest to the team are known as cardiac colonyforming unit fibroblasts ccfufs and they are responsible for forming scar tissue following a heart attack getting an edge on heart failure a heart attack occurs when the supply of blood to the heart is stopped and because no oxygen is reaching sections of the tissue they become damaged which triggers inflammation in the region in the inflamed tissue ccfufs begin to replace damaged cells with `` collagenbased scar tissue '' as chong explains `` this is a problem because scarring of heart tissue can reduce the hearts ability to pump blood effectively which can lead to heart failure '' the team found that vitamin d was able to block the action of ccfufs thereby preventing the buildup of scar tissue and potentially stopping a blockage from developing their results are published this week in the journal heart lung and circulation on the importance of the results chong explains `` cardiovascular diseases including heart attacks and heart failure are the leading cause of death worldwide '' '' to change this we need to research heart conditions from every possible angle this study is the first to demonstrate the role of 125d in regulating cardiac progenitor cells and the findings are encouraging with further study vitamin d could prove to be an exciting lowcost addition to current treatments and we hope to progress these findings into clinical trials for humans '' so although research into vitamin d and its cardioprotective powers is in its infancy the results are encouraging finding any intervention that improves the chances of battling heart disease is good news and finding one that is readily available is an added bonus if you are interested in purchasing vitamin d supplements there is a huge range available online we picked linked items based on the quality of products and list the pros and cons of each to help you determine which will work best for you we partner with some of the companies that sell these products which means healthline uk and our partners may receive a portion of revenues if you make a purchase using a links abovea potential new therapeutic target for multiple sclerosis has now been identified in a new study conducted by researchers at the university of alberta and mcgill university both in canada the results are published in the journal jci insight researchers have found that mice that lack a specific brain protein may be resistant to ms multiple sclerosis ms is a disease affecting the brain spinal cord and optic nerves symptoms of which can include `` cognitive impairment dizziness tremors and fatigue '' ms severity can vary wildly from case to case in mild cases a person might experience minor symptoms such as numbness in the limbs severe cases of ms might result in more serious symptoms including paralysis or loss of vision but it is not currently possible for us to predict which cases will progress to this level and which will remain mild it is estimated that around 23 million people across the globe are living with ms and the disease is `` two to three times more common in women than in men '' scientists do not understand the causes of ms very well but they do know that the disease begins when t cells which are a type of white blood cell enter the brain when in the brain t cells attack a protective substance called myelin that sheathes the neurons in the brain and spinal cord and which helps the nerves to conduct electrical signals the t cells erode myelin resulting in lesions that leave the nerves exposed as ms lesions become progressively worse nerves become damaged or broken thereby interrupting the flow of electrical impulses from the brain to the bodys muscles mice without calnexin were resistant to ms in the new study the researchers examined tissues from donated human brains they found that the brains of people with ms had very high levels of a protein called calnexin compared with the brains of people who did not have ms the team then used mice that had been bred to model human ms to examine the influence of calnexin in living creatures could eating more fish lower ms risk researchers say that increasing fish intake could reduce the risk of ms read now the study authors were very surprised to find that mice that did not have calnexin seemed to be `` completely resistant '' to ms '' it turns out that calnexin is somehow involved in controlling the function of the bloodbrain barrier '' explains study coauthor marek michalak from the university of alberta '' this structure usually acts like a wall and restricts the passage of cells and substances from the blood into the brain '' he adds `` when there is too much calnexin this wall gives angry t cells access to the brain where they destroy myelin '' michalak and colleagues believe that these findings identify calnexin as a potentially vital target for developing future ms therapies '' our challenge now is to tease out exactly how this protein works in the cells involved in making up the bloodbrain barrier '' adds coauthor luis agellon from the mcgill school of human nutrition '' if we knew exactly what calnexin does in this process then we could find a way to manipulate its function to promote resistance for developing ms ''there is a strong link between mens low levels of testosterone and having two or more chronic diseases such as arthritis high blood pressure and type 2 diabetes even in the under40s how could having low testosterone levels affect your overall health this was the conclusion of a study that for the first time examined the relationship between total testosterone age and specific chronic conditions in a representative sample of the adult male population of the united states '' if we look at data for men from a population level '' states lead author mark peterson an assistant professor of physical medicine and rehabilitation at the university of michigan in ann arbor `` it has become evident over time that chronic disease is on the rise in older males '' he goes on to explain however that they are also finding that obesity and physical inactivity may be responsible for testosterone decline `` even at younger ages '' the researchers report their findings in a paper now published in the journal scientific reports the traditional view of testosterone is that it is mainly involved in sexspecific development of the male human body however it is becoming increasingly evident that the hormone plays many different roles including some that are not sexrelated in both males and females we know for example that testosterone is important for bone health and cardiovascular function and that it can have a beneficial impact on `` lean muscle mass and body fat '' testosterone decline and disease risk the new study concerns the importance of testosterone in male human health and what effects might be linked to its decline previous studies have demonstrated that testosterone levels fall in men as they get older and that deficiency of the hormone is also linked to the sorts of chronic diseases that often accompany obesity '' but it hasnt been previously understood '' explains prof peterson `` what the optimal levels of total testosterone should be in men at varying ages and to what effect those varying levels of the hormone have on disease risk across the life span '' even light exercise can increase mens lifespan older men may reduce their risk of premature death with regular bouts of just a few minutes of lowintensity physical activity read now in their new paper he and his colleagues note that while `` normal ranges '' for total testosterone in `` young healthy men '' have been defined these are based on studies of groups that are not representative of the `` growing ethnically diverse us population '' in addition those studies excluded people with `` chronic multimorbidity '' that is those with more than one chronic illness therefore prof peterson and colleagues designed their study to examine the relationship between total testosterone deficiency and chronic multimorbidity in `` a large populationrepresentative sample of us men '' they also designed it to look at the effect in different age groups data drawn from national health survey the team used data from the national health and nutrition examination survey which assesses the health and dietary status of the us population using a combination of interviews and physical exams their analysis included 2161 men aged 20 and older for whom there was complete information on age and other demographics diagnosed chronic illnesses testosterone levels as measured from blood samples grip strength and laboratoryconfirmed risk factors for cardiometabolic disease first they calculated the prevalence of nine chronic conditions in the representative sample these were arthritis cardiovascular disease clinical depression high blood pressure high cholesterol high triglycerides pulmonary disease stroke and type 2 diabetes they then examined how the prevalence of having two or more of these conditions varied across `` young middleaged and older men with and without testosterone deficiency '' young men were defined as aged 20–399 years middleaged men as 40–599 years and older men as aged 60 years and above significant doseresponse relationship the results from across all age groups revealed that having two or more chronic diseases was more common in men with low total testosterone than in those with normal levels and it was particularly striking among the young men and older men further analysis showed that there was a significant `` doseresponse relationship '' at play which prof peterson says `` means that men should be concerned about declining total testosterone even if it has not reached a level to warrant a clinical diagnosis `` the level of clinical diagnosis he refers to is if total testosterone falls below 300 nanograms per deciliter or 104 nanomoles per liter the scientists suggest that while the study does not prove that the decline of testosterone causes chronic diseases it should prompt further research and expand clinicians understanding of the hormone they also hope that their findings will raise mens awareness about testosterone deficiency `` a lot of men may not be aware of the risk factors for testosterone deficiency because of their current lifestyle '' says prof peterson '' and more importantly that declining levels could be contributing to a silent decline in overall health and increased risk for chronic disease '' prof mark petersondiet is important to health and wellbeing and researchers bring an increasing amount of evidence in support of the saying `` you are what you eat '' so how does diet affect our brain health in the long run a new study investigates brains tend to shrink with age but could eating healthfully prevent this as we age our brains tend to shrink in volume `` at a rate of around 5 percent per decade after age 40 '' to be more precise and the more they shrink the more this seems to affect an individuals cognitive abilities however there may be ways of maintaining a healthy brain volume even as we grow older such as by paying more attention to what we eat on a daytoday basis a study published last year in the journal nature ecology evolution revealed that nonhuman primates brain size can be predicted by the type of diet they favor but is the same true in humans '' people with greater brain volume have been shown to have better cognitive abilities '' notes dr meike w vernooij from the erasmus university medical center in rotterdam the netherlands `` so initiatives that help improve diet quality may be a good strategy to maintain thinking skills in older adults '' but she adds `` more research is needed to confirm these results and to examine the pathways through which diet can affect the brain '' dr vernooij and colleagues recently conducted a study on a large netherlandsbased population sample to see if they could observe any associations between dietary preferences and brain size as well as the existence of any cognitive impairments their findings published yesterday in the online issue of the journal neurology seem to indicate that healthful diets rich in fruit and vegetables may help to protect the brain against agerelated shrinkage best diets for health the researchers worked with 4213 participants with an average age of 66 and who did not have a diagnosis of dementia they were all asked to fill in questionnaires assessing what they typically ate over the course of 1 month among the food groups featured in the questionnaires there were vegetables fruit whole grainbased foods legumes nuts dairy fish tea unsaturated fats red meat processed meat sugary drinks alcohol and salt how dark chocolate could boost brain health immunity is dark chocolate the key to protecting brain cell health read now dr vernooij and team evaluated the quality of individual diets based on dutch dietary guidelines for the public and they gave each type of diet a score from zero least healthful to 14 most healthful in the researchers assessment the best diets for health were rich in vegetable fruit nut whole grain dairy and fish content and they included very few sugary drinks on average participants diets gained a score of seven mri scans also revealed that the average total brain volume among this population sample was 932 milliliters the researchers also used mri scans to determine the number of white matter lesions in the brain which have been associated with cognitive impairments and nonsevere brain bleeds other general health information which might have a bearing on brain volume shrinkage was also collected including instances of hypertension smoking habits and levels of physical activity complex interactions between food groups dr vernooij and colleagues analysis revealed that a higher diet score corresponding to a more healthful diet was associated with a greater brain volume even after adjusting for confounding factors such as head size variations age sex smoking habits and exercise specifically individuals with better dietary habits had 2 extra milliliters on average in terms of brain volume compared with peers who had less healthful diets but diet did not prove relevant to white matter lesions or the occurrence of brain bleeds to ascertain what types of food would be best for brain health the researchers also adjusted their diet assessment in favor of mediterranean diet templates which similarly feature plenty of vegetables nuts and fish once more the investigators found that those participants who adhered to vegetable and fishrich diets tended to maintain larger total brain volumes than their counterparts who went for less healthful dietary options as a result of this the researchers concluded that brain volume was maintained by adherence to a healthful diet favoring a combination of the food groups mentioned above '' there are many complex interactions that can occur across different food components and nutrients and according to our research people who ate a combination of healthier foods had larger brain tissue volumes '' dr meike w vernooij however the researchers warn that the new studys findings do not necessarily imply that eating certain types of food will boost brain volume instead they show an association between more healthful diets and better brain size maintenancetoo much salt is bad for you particulary because it is associated with an increased risk of heart problems but how much is too much a new study suggests that we may not have to worry so much about how salty we like our food to be a new international study suggests that we may want to rethink how much salt is actually harmful table salt which we commonly use to season our food contains sodium sodium if often ingested in large quantities can lead to a range of cardiovascular problems including hypertension the world health organization who say that a person should not consume more than 2 grams of sodium per day which is about 5 grams of salt per day the american heart association aha recommend no more than 25 grams of sodium per day though they state that the ideal intake is of no more than 15 grams per day for an adult however researchers from a range of international institutions including mcmaster university and hamilton health sciences both in hamilton canada as well institutions from 21 other countries suggest that these limits are unnecessarily low researcher andrew mente and colleagues conducted a study of 94000 people aged 35–70 aiming to establish how much sodium really is too much for heart health current guidelines the team notes push for standards that are unrealistic for many seeing as salt is often an almost invisible ingredient contained by numerous packaged foods '' the who recommend consumption of less than 2 grams of sodium thats one teaspoon of salt a day as a preventative measure against cardiovascular disease '' says mente he also adds however that `` there is little evidence in terms of improved health outcomes that individuals ever achieve at such a low level '' the new study whose results are now featured in the lancet now suggests that we can be more lenient about our salt consumption without fearing that it will harm our cardiovascular health slightly higher sodium intake is safe the study followed the participants who were based in communities across 18 different countries for an average period of 8 years mente and his colleagues revealed that a high intake of sodium did lead to an increased risk of cardiovascular disease and stroke but only in communities where the average intake for an adult was greater than 5 grams per day this amounts to about 25 teaspoons of table salt the researchers explain large study reviews the cardiovascular benefits of walnuts is it true that walnuts protect heart health read now encouragingly the researchers also noticed that under 5 percent of the participants coming from developed countries exceeded the 5gram cutoff point for sodium intake in most of the countries the majority of the communities that the researchers observed had an average sodium intake of 3–5 grams of sodium or 15 to 25 teaspoons of salt per day in fact of all the populations in the study only those from china showed a consistently high intake of sodium specifically 80 percent of the communities from china had a sodium intake that was higher than 5 grams per day '' only in the communities with the most sodium intake those over 5 grams per day of sodium which is mainly in china did we find a direct link between sodium intake and major cardiovascular events like heart attack and stroke '' mente explains on the other hand he adds `` in communities that consumed less than 5 grams of sodium a day the opposite was the case sodium consumption was inversely associated with myocardial infarction or heart attacks and total mortality and there was no increase in stroke '' community interventions can help even in the case of individuals who do consume too much table salt however the situation is not unsalvageable the researchers say mente notes that people can easily redress the balance and protect their heart health by making a few simple adjustments to their diets such as adding more fruits vegetables and foods naturally rich in potassium '' we found all major cardiovascular problems including death decreased in communities and countries where there is an increased consumption of potassium which is found in foods such as fruits vegetables dairy foods potatoes and nuts and beans '' says the study author another one of the researches involved with the current study martin odonnell notes that most of the studies looking at the relationship between sodium intake and cardiovascular risk so far have focused on individual data rather than information collected from larger cohorts this he suggests may have skewed the best practice guidelines into a direction that is both unrealistic and perhaps too cautious '' public health strategies should be based on best evidence our findings demonstrate that communitylevel interventions to reduce sodium intake should target communities with high sodium consumption and should be embedded within approaches to improve overall dietary quality '' martin odonnell '' there is no convincing evidence that people with moderate or average sodium intake need to reduce their sodium intake for prevention of heart disease and stroke '' odonnell adds